Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



^ .. . 








*• 



< / 

) ' 



y^' 



•^ 



>*■ *. V 



tS ^. 









sr' 



BLACfCIE'S JUNIOR SCHOOL SHAKESPEARE 



THE TRAGEDY 

MACBETH 



EDITED BY 

HENRY C. NOTCUTT, b.a.(Lond.) 

ASSISTANT LECTURER AT THE SOUTH AFRICAN COLLEGE, CAPE TOWN 




LONDON 

BLACKIE & SON, Limited, 50 OLD BAILEY, B.C. 

GLASGOW AND DUBLIN 

1895 



BLAGKIE'S JUNIOR SCHOOL SHAKESPEARE. 
In Fcap 8vo volumes, cloth liiup. 



The Merchant of Venice. Edited by GEORaB H. Elt, B.A., 
sometime Assistant Master in the United Westminster Schools. 
112 pp., price 8d. 

King: Henry the Biflrhth. By the same Editor. 128 pp., price 8d. 

As You Like It. Edited by Lionel W. Lyde, M.A., sometime 
Exhibitioner of Queen's College, Oxford; Head English Master 
in Glasgow Academy. 120 pp., price 8d. 

King Henry the Fifth. Edited by W. Barrt, B.A., English 
Master at Tettenhall College, StaflFordshire. 128 pp., price 8d. 

King Richard the 3econd. By the same Editor. 128 pp. 
price 8d. 

Coriolanus. Edited by Walter Dent. 168 pp., price lOd. 

Julius C«sar. By the same Editor. 112 pp., price Sd. 

A Midsummer Night's Dream. Edited by W. F. Bauoust, 
Chief Master of Modem Subjects in the United Westminster 
Schools. 96 pp. , price Sd, 

The Tempest. Edited by Elizabeth Lee, Lecturer in English 
Literature at the Streatham Hill High School. 104 pp., 
price 8d. 

King John. Edited by F. £. Webb, B.A., sometime Scholar of 
Queen's College, Oxford. 112 pp., price 8d. 

Hamlet. Edited by L. W. Ltde, M.A. 168 pp., price lOd. 

Twelfth Night. Edited by Elizabeth Lee. 112 pp., price 8d. 

Macbeth. Edited by H. J. Notcutt, B.A., Assistant Lecturer 
at the South African College, Cape Town. 110 pp., price 8d. 



GENERAL PREFACE. 



The Junior School Shakespeare is an attempt to provide 
an edition of the best plays which will meet the needs of the 
youngest students of the dramatist. All the plays in the 
series are edited on the same general plan, which presents 
some novel features. Its characteristics may be stated thus: 

The Text has in every case been prepared with great care. 
All passages that it might be thought undesirable to read in 
class have been omitted. 

In the Introduction^ while all necessary information is fur- 
nished concerning the origin and date of the play, and other 
such externalia, it has been considered equally important to 
discuss, in simple and familiar language, the literary qualities 
of the play, and its characters. 

The aim of the Notes is to explain briefly and clearly all 
unfamiliar words and allusions, and to point out some of the 
diiferences between Elizabethan and Present English without 
excess of philological material. Additional features are : that 
a free paraphrase is given wherever a verbal explanation 
would be insufficient; that parallel passages and references to 
other authors are very sparingly employed; and that there 
are hints towards the interpretation of character and motive, 
and towards the appreciation of the play as an actual work of 
stagecraft. 

The Classified Index gathers up and tabulates the notabilia 
of the play, supplying full references to the notes bearing on 
them, and is intended to assist the student in obtaining a 
thorough grip of his work. 

It is believed that this edition will be found particularly 
suited to junior candidates in the University Local and similar 
examinations, the editors of the several volumes being teachers 
who have practical experience of their needs. 

The series will also be found suitable as annotated read- 
ing books in the upper classes of those elementary schools in 
which Shakespeare is read. 



CONTENTS. 



Page 

General Preface, iii 

Introduction, 7 

Dramatis PERSONiE, 14 

Macbeth, 15 

Notes, 74 

Classified Index, 104 



INTRODUCTION. 



1. THE DATE OF THE PLAY. 

In recent years much care has been given to finding out the order in 
which the plays of Shakespeare were written. This is a more im- 
portant matter than it appears to be at first sight, for it is only 
through a correct knowledge of the order of the plays that we are 
able to recognize and study the wonderfiil growth of his powers, 
from the days when he showed his 'prentice hand in such plays as 
the Midsummer NighVs Dream^ till the time when his greatness 
had fiilly ripened, and he produced Hamlet^ Macbeth^ and the 
Tempest. 

Now there is a good deal of difficulty in finding out the exact date 
of many of the plays, because they were written to be acted, not to 
be printed, and no regular record of the appearance of new plays 
was kept, or if kept it has not come down to us. Only about half 
of Shakespeare's plays were printed during his lifetime, and of those 
many were brought out without his permission. The means for 
deciding when he wrote any particular play are therefore often very 
imperfect. It is believed that Macbeth was written about the year 
1606, and the chief reasons for fixing on this date are briefly as 
follows : — 

(i) It must have been after the accession of James I. (1603), for 

the union of the English and Scotch crowns under that king is 

referred to in Macbeth's words: 

Some I see 

That two-fold balls and treble sceptres carry. 

(iv. X. X17.) 

The same king is also referred to in iv. 3. 129-148. 

(2) It cannot be later than 1610, because on the 20th of April in 
that year Dr. Simon Forman saw it acted at the Globe Theatre, 
and wrote an account of it in his diary which is still to be seen in 
the Bodleian Library at Oxford. But this was not necessarily the 
first performance of the play. 

There is no doubt, then, that Macbeth was written between 1603 
and 1610. To fix its date more exactly we have to rely on some less 
definite indications. 



8 MACBETH. 

(3) The words, "Here's a farmer that hanged himself on the 
expectation of plenty" (ii. 3. 5) suggest the date 1606, for in that 
year the price of wheat is known to have been unusually low. 

(4) The words, *' Here 's an equivocator that could swear in both 
scales against either scale; who committed treason enough for God's 
sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven " (ii. 3. 9) were probably 
intended to refer to the trial of Henry Garnet, a Jesuit, and one of 
the conspirators in the Gunpowder Plot. At his trial, which took 
place in 1606, he stated that he believed equivocation to be lawful. 

The fact that these two passages come close together strengthens 
the probability that they are meant to refer to the events named, 
and as allusions of this kind are generally introduced when the 
matters referred to are fresh in the recollection of everyone, we axe 
led to fix on the year 1606 as the most probable date for Macbeth. 

2. THE STORY OF THE PLAY. 

When the sons of Canute were ruling in England, Duncan, the 
grandson of Malcolm, was King of Scotland. One of his thanes, 
Macdonwald, had rebelled against him, aJid was receiving help from 
the King of Norway. The rebellion was crushed by Macbeth and 
Banquo, the former of whom was Duncan's cousin. While return- 
ing from the war to report their success to Duncan, they meet 
three witches on a heath, who salute Macbeth by his own title of 
Thane of Glamis, and also as Thane of Cawdor, and tell him that 
one day he will be king. To Banquo they promise that his 
descendants shall be kings though he will not himself wear the 
crown. No sooner have the witches vanished than the Thane of 
Ross meets Macbeth, and in Duncan's name gives him the title of 
Thane of Cawdor. This rapid fulfilment of the words of the witches 
startles Macbeth, and he at once thinks of making the rest come true 
by murdering Duncan and seizing the throne. He sends to his wife 
an account of what has happened, and she too makes up her mind 
that he shall have the whole of what the witches have promised him. 
Duncan comes to spend the night at Macbeth's castle, and then 
Macbeth hesitates to carry out his dark purpose. At length, stung 
by his wife's taunts, he nerves himself to the deed, and murders his 
guest. Malcolm and Donalbain, the sons of Duncan, flee from the 
place, and the report is spread that they had incited the king's 
guards to commit the murder. 

Macbeth is now crowned king, but is uneasy because of the pro- 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

mise made by the witches to Banquo. To rid himself of this trouble 
he arranged for Banquo and Fleance, his son, to be murdered. The 
father fells, but the son escapes. At a great banquet held the same 
night, Macbeth thinks that he sees the ghost of Banquo, and horri- 
fies the guests by his cries. The next day he visits the witches, and 
in their cavern is warned against Macduff, a thane who would not 
give his support to the usurper, but is comforted by the assurances 
that no one bom of woman shall harm him, and that he shall never 
be vanquished till Birnam Wood shall come to Dunsinane Hill. He 
seizes the castle of Macduff, and puts to death his wife and children. 
. Macduff himself has fled to England, and with Malcolm, Duncan's 
eldest son, and Siward, Earl of Northumbria, is planning the over- 
throw of Macbeth. 

The strain of these terrible events has shattered the strong mind 
of Lady Macbeth; she walks in her sleep, talking of the guilty secrets 
hidden in her heart, and before the English army has surrounded 
their castle she dies. Macbeth prepares to meet them, but is cowed 
when a report is brought to him that Birnam Wood, is coming to 
Dunsinane Hill. The English soldiers have cut down branches of 
the trees, and are carrying them to conceal their numbers. The 
words of the witches are now coming true in an unexpected way, 
and Macduff, who was not bom of woman, ends the tragedy by 
slaying Macbeth in battle. Scotland is freed from the tyrant, and 
Malcolm is crowned king. 

3. THE SOURCE OF THE PLOT. 

Shakespeare took the story of Macbeth from the Chronicle of 
England i Scotland, and Ireland, by Raphael Holinshed and others. 
This was first published in 1577, but the edition which Shakespeare 
used was the second, published in 1587. The play follows closely 
Holinshed*s story of the reigns of Duncan and Macbeth; but in one 
important matter Shakespeare has made an alteration to suit his own 
purpose. Holinshed does relate that Macbeth slew Duncan, but the 
details are altogether different from those in the play. There is 
another murder story in Holinshed — the murder of King Duff, 
Duncan's great-grandfather, by Donwald and his wife — and it is 
from this that Shakespeare drew the details of his murder scene. 

4. THE HISTORICAL ACCURACY OF THE PLAY. 

The story of Macbeth is based upon feet, but a great deal of 
Holinshed's narrative must be regarded as legend rather than his- 



10 MACBETH. 

tory, and of course the play keeps less closely to the fects than docs 
the book on which it is based. It is difficult now to say what the 
exact course of events was, but the following summary will give 
some idea of the extent to which the story is true. 

A. Points in which the play is historically accurate. 

1. There was a King of Scotland named Duncan who ruled a 
little before the time of Edward the Confessor (1034- 1040). 

2. He had a cousin named Macbeth who was in command of the 
army, 

3. Duncan was murdered either by Macbeth in person or by his 
orders. 

4. After reigning for some time Macbeth was defeated by an 
English army under Siward, Earl of Northumbria, and in this battle j 
Siward's son was slain. | 

5. Malcolm, the eldest son of Duncan, succeeded Macbeth. 

B. Chief points in which the play is historically untrue, 

1. There is reason to believe that the rebellion of Macdonwald, 
mentioned early in the play, never took place, though it is found in 
Holinshed. 

2. Macbeth did not fight against the Norwegians, but was helped 
by them in his attempt to gain the crown. 

3. Duncan was not murdered in Macbeth's castle but at Both- 
gowan, or the Smith's house, near Elgin. 

4. Macbeth's reign was not a time of misery but of prosperity in 
Scotland ; he was noted for his liberality to the Church. 

5. Macbeth lived for three years after his defeat by Siward (1054) ; 
he was killed in battle with Malcolm in 1057. 

6. The minor characters are of course invented, and it is even 
^ uncertain whether Macduff and Banquo had any real existence. 

5. CRITICAL REMARKS. 

If we had no external evidence to show when Macdeth was written, 
a careful reading of the play would soon make it evident that it 
belonged to a time when Shakespeare's powers had reached their 
full ripeness. It is one of the most powerful and harmonious of his 
works, and leaves the impression of having been composed very 
rapidly, struck out at a white heat. 

(i) In real life every man's character is a mixture of good and 



INTRODUCTION. 1 1 

l3ad qualities ; and, as Shakespeare has drawn for us the most lifelike 
pictures of men and women, they too show the same mixture. 
Macbeth has his good points. He is a brave and capable soldier, 
as we find at the beginning and even at the end of the play; he is 
attached to his wife ; he is capable of true and noble feelings. But 
the main cause of his going to the bad is his consuming selfishness. 
Through the whole story no single thought of the welfare of Scot- 
land guides his actions ; only once does it seem to occur to him that 
to make his wife queen is at least as worthy an object as to make 
himself king ; and so marked is this selfishness that it is even at the 
root of the causes which make him hesitate to murder Duncan ; for 
he fears that the golden opinions which he has won by crushing the 
late rebellion will be lost if any suspicions are aroused that he has 
had a hand in the murder. Towards the end of the play this be- 
comes still more evident. For instance, when Lady Macbeth is 
seriously ill he asks the doctor attending her how the patient is, but 
he shows at once that he is thinking more of the troubles weighing 
upon his own mind than of his wife ; and so completely is he wrapped 
up in himself that he actually goes on to say: "Throw physic to 
the dogs ; I '11 none of it '*, quite forgetting that the doctor is there to 
prescribe for Lady Macbeth, not for him. When the news of her 
death is brought to him, it only moves him to a few general remarks 
on the shortness and vanity of life. This is his main characteristic ; 
but two or three other points should be noticed. Firstly, the readi- 
ness with which he yields to the temptation suggested by the saluta- 
tion of the witches. There was no direct prompting to evil in their 
words. Banquo is not stirred to plots and treason by their promises 
to him. Macbeth, being of royal blood, might well have supposed 
that in the course of nature the crown would come to him without 
his seeking. But his mind is so prepared for evil that the idea of 
securing by murder the promised title flashes before him in a mo- 
ment, and so lays hold of him as to shake his very nature. Again, 
his cowardice and hesitation when there is no call for immediate 
action stand in strong contrast to his readiness and bravery in battle. 
This comes out clearly while he and his wife are plotting the murder 
of Duncan, and again towards the end of the play, when the time for 
meeting the English forces is drawing near but has not yet come. 
Lastly, it must not be overlooked that the ruin which Macbeth brings 
upon himself is quite as much inward and spiritual as it is outward 
and visible. Before his first crime he is able to banish the illusion 
of the dagger by an effort of will ; and even after murdering Duncan 



12 MACBETH. 

he can stiil meet his fellows with self-control and every appearana 
of innocence. But when he has gone on to remove Banquo from 
his path, and his excited imagination makes him see the form of his 
murdered comrade, he cannot banish that, and he utters words in 
the presence of the assembled guests which more than hint at his 
guilty secrets. From this point his very crimes become purposeless; 
to put Lady Macduff to death can do nothing to make his seat on 
the throne more safe ; and in the last act the ruin of his mental and 
moral power is complete. 

(2) Lady Macbeth is a far finer character than her husband. She 
has an iron will as unbending as his is changeful, and when she has 
once made up her mind to a line of action, no thought of heaven or 
hell can turn her from her purpose. It is this very strength of 
will that leads her to the worst action of her life; for when he 
husband is inclined to draw back from the plan they had formed 
she can hardly understand such hesitation, and urges him on in the 
course which they had determined upon till he nerves himself ^ 
the dreadful deed. So too, when she feels the deep misery of their 
position, and how little they have gained by the crime, she crushes 
down every sign of this feeling in her husband's presence, and is as 
ready to support him as ever ; while at the banquet she strains every 
nerve to make him throw off his morbid fancies and realize the 
danger of his position. But with all this strength of will she cannot 
wholly put off her woman's nature ; she cannot use the knife upon 
Duncan; she fiunts when Macbeth describes his dead body; her 
wretchedness finds expression when she is alone; she is exhausted 
and broken down after the banquet, till at last the strain is too great 
for her frail body. The sleep-walking is a sign of the collapse of 
her marvellous self-control, and death soon follows. Through the 
whole sad story it must be remembered that her cruelty and crime 
are not for her own sake but for Macbeth's. His advancement and 
his safety were her single aim. His selfishness stands in marked 
contrast to her entire devotion to him, and we cannot but feel that 
if he had been a worthier man she might have been one of the 
noblest women in Scottish history. 

(3) Banquo does not fill a lai^e space in the play, but his char- 
acter is drawn with masterly precision. He is a loyal -hearted, 
upright soldier, whose advice in council was '* both grave and pros* 
perous ", and whose bravery in battle was no less than Macbeth's. 
We see how free his mind was from any taipt of evil in the meeting 
with the witches on the heath. Their promises suggest no evil 



INTRODUCTION. 1 3 

thoughts to him ; he is startled and curious, but in a manly, straight- 
forward way, not with the excited and unhealthy curiosity which 

Macbeth shows. 

• 

(4) The witches may be regarded as representing the evil sugges- 
tions which may occur to any man, and which have power over him 
just as he is willing or unwilling to listen to them. So Macbeth 
gjives himself up to their direction, while Banquo never sees them 
after the first meeting on the heath. 

(5) The text of Afacdefk is in a somewhat corrupt condition. It 
was not printed till seven years after Shakespeare's death, and there 
is reason for believing that the copy used by the printers was one 
that had suffered some alterations. These cannot be discussed in 
detail here, but briefly it may be said that some passages have pro- 
bably been cut out of the play as it first stood, and others inserted. 
The lines spoken by Hecate and a few others of similar style were 
probably inserted by Middleton, a dramatist about six years younger 
than Shakespeare, and whose play TAe Witch has some curious 
resemblances to Macbeth, 



DRAMATIS PERSONiC. 



> his sons. 

rH ^ 

' j- generals of the king's army. 



' noblemen of Scotland. 



Duncan, King of Scotland. 

Malcolm, 

donalbain, . 

Macbeth, 

Banquo, 

Macduff, "^ 

Lennox, 

Ross, 

Menteith, 

Angus, 

Caithness,-/ 

Fleancb, son to Banquo. 

Si WARD, Earl of Northumberland, general of the English forces. 

Young SiwARD, his son. 

Seyton, an officer attending on Macbeth. 

Boy, son to Macduff. 

An English Doctor. 

A Scotch Doctor. 

A Soldier. 

A Porter. 

An Old Man. 

Lady Macbeth. 
Lady Macduff. 
Gentlewoman attending on Lady Macbeth. 

[Hecate.] 
Three Witches. 
Apparitions. 

Lords. Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murderers, Attendants, and Messengers. 

Scene: Scotland: England. 



MACBETH. 

ACT I. 

Scene I. A desert place. 
Thunder and lightning. Enter three Witches. 

First Witch. When shall we three meet again 
In thunder, lightning, or in rain? 

Sec. Witch. When the hurly-burly 's done, 
When the battle 's lost and won. 

Third Witch. That will be ere the set of sun. 5 

First Witch. Where the place? 

Sec. Witch. Upon the heath. 

Third Witch. There to meet with Macbeth. 

First Witch. I come, Graymalkin! 

Sec. Witch. Paddock calls. 

Third Witch. Anon. 10 

All. Fair is foul, and foul is fair : 
Hover through the fog and filthy air. \Exeunt. 

Scene II. A camp near Forres. 

Alarum within. Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, 
Lennox, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding Captain. 

Dun. What bloody man is that? He can report, 
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt 
The newest state. 

Mai. This is the sergeant 

Who like a good and hardy soldier fought 
'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend ! 5 

Say to the king the knowledge of the broil 
As thou didst leave it. 

Cap. Doubtful it stood ; 

As two spent swimmers, that do cling together 
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald — 
Worthy to be a rebel, for to that 10 

The multiplying villanies of nature 
Do swarm upon him — from the western isles 



i6 MACBETH. [Act I. 

Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied ; 

And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, 

Shpw'd like a rebel's wench : but all 's too weak : 1 5 

For brave Macbeth — well he deserves that name — 

Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, 

Which smoked with bloody execution. 

Like valour's minion carved out his passage 

Till he faced the slave ; 20 

Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, 

Till he unseamed him from the nave to the chaps, 

And fix'd his head upon our battlements. 

Dun. O valiant cousin ! worthy gentleman ! 

Cap. As whence the sun 'gins his reflection 25 \ 

Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break. 
So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come 
Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark : 
No sooner justice had with valour arm'd 
Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, 30 

But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage. 
With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men 
Began a fresh assault. 

Dun. Dismay'd not this 

Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo ? 

Cap. Yes ; 

As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. 35 

If I say sooth, I must report they were 
As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they 
Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe : 
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, 
Or memorize another Golgotha, 40 

I cannot tell — 
But I am faint, my gashes cry for help. 

Dun. So well thy words become thee as thy wounds ; 
They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons. 

{Exit Cc^tain^ attended. 
Who comes here? 

Enter Ross and ANGUS. 

Mai, The worthy thane of Ross. 45 

Len. What a haste looks through his eyes 1 So should he 
look 
That seems to speak things strange. 
Ross. God save the king ! 

Dun. Whence cam'st thou, worthy thane? 
Ross. From Fife, great king; 

(M113) 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 17 

Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky 

And fan our people cold. Norway himself, 50 

With terrible numbers, 

Assisted by that most disloyal traitor 

The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict ; 

Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, 

Confronted him with self-comparisons, 55 

Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. 

Curbing his lavish spirit : and, to conclude. 

The victory fell on us. 

Dun. Great happiness ! 

Ross. That now 

Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition ; 
Nor would we deign him burial of his men 60 

Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch 
Ten thousand dollars to our general use. 

Dun. No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive 
Our bosom interest : go pronounce his present death, 
And with his former title greet Macbeth. 65 

Ross. I '11 see it done. 

Dun. What he hath lost noble Macbeth hath won. 

\Exeunt. 

Scene III. A heath near Forres. 

Thunder, Enter the three Witches. 

First Witch. Where hast thou been, sister? 

Sec. Witch. Killing swine. 

Third Witch. Sister, where thou? 

First Witch. A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, 
And munch'd, and munch'd, and munch'd: — *Give me', 
quoth 1 : 5 

* Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries. 
Her husband 's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger : 
But in a sieve I '11 thither sail. 
And, like a rat without a tail, 
I '11 do, I '11 do, and I '11 do. 10 

Sec. Witch. I '11 give thee a wind. 

First Witch. Thou 'rt kind. 

Third Witch. And I another. 

First Witch. I myself have all the other. 
And the very ports they blow, 15 

All the cjuarters that they know 
I' the shipman's card. 
I will drain him dry as hay : 

(MUS) B 



1 8 MACBETH. [Act I. 

Sleep shall neither night nor day i 

Hang upon his pent-house lid ; 20 

He shall live a man forbid : 

Weary se'nnights nine times nine 

Shall he dwindle, peak and pine : 

Though his bark cannot be lost, 

Yet it shall be tempest- tost. 25 

Look what I have. 

Sec, Witch, Show me, show me. 

First Witch, Here I have a pilot's thumb, 
Wreck'd as homeward he did come. {Drum within. 

Third Witch, A drum, a drum ! 30 

Macbeth doth come. 

All. The weird sisters, hand in hand. 
Posters of the sea and land. 
Thus do go about, about : 

Thrice to thine and thrice to mine 35 

And thrice again, to make up nine. 
Peace ! the charm 's wound up. 

Enter Macbeth and Banquo. 

Macb, So foul and fair a day I have not seen. 

Ban. How far is't called to Forres? What are these 
So withered and so wild in their attire, 40 

That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth. 
And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught 
That man may question? You seem to understand me, 
By each at once her choppy finger laying 
Upon her skinny lips : you should be women, 45 

And yet your beards forbid me to interpret 
That you are so. 

Macb, Speak, if you can: what are you? 

First Witch, All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of 
Glamis ! 

Sec. Witch, All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of 
Cawdor ! 

Third Witch, All hail, Macbeth, xhat shalt be king here 
after ! 50 

Ban, Good sir, why do you start ; and seem to fear 
Things that do sound so fair? — I' the name of truth. 
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed 
Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner 
You greet with present grace and great prediction 55 

Of noble having and of royal hope, 
That he seems ragt withal : to me you speak not 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 19 

If you can look into the seeds of time, 

And say which grain will ^row and which will not, 

Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear 60 

Your favours nor your hate. 

First Witch. Hail! 

Sec. Witch. Hail! 

Third Witch. Hail ! 

First Witch. Lesser than Macbeth, and greater. 65 

Sec. Witch. Not so happy, yet much happier. 

Third Witch. Thou shalt g^t kings, though thou be none : 
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo ! 

First Witch. Banquo and Macbeth, all hail ! 

McLcb. Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more: ^o 

By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis ; 
But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives, 
A prosperous gentleman ; and to be king 
Stands not within the prospect of belief, 
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence 75 

You owe this strange intelligence? or why 
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way 
With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you. 

[ Witches vanish. 

Ban. The earth hath bubbles, as the water has. 
And these are of them. Whither are they vanish'd? 80 

Macb. Into the air ; and what seem'd corporal melted 
As breath into the wind. Would they had sta/d! 

Ban. Were such things here as we do speak about? 
Or have we eaten on the insane root 
That takes the reason prisoner? 85 

Macb. Your children shall be kings. 

Ban. You shall be king. 

Macb. And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so? 

Ban. To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here? 

Enter Ross and ANGUS. 

Ross. The king hath happily received, Macbeth, 
The news of thy success ; and when he reads 90 

Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight. 
His wonders and his praises do contend 
Which should be thine or his : silenced with that, 
In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, 
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, 95 

Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, 
Strange images of death. As thick as hail 
Came post with post ; and every one did t|par 



/ 

I* 



20 MACBETH. [Act I 

Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, 
And pour'd them down before him. 

Ang. We are sent 100 

To give thee from our royal master thanks ; 
Only to herald thee into his sight, 
Not pay thee. 

Ross. And, for an earnest of a greater honour, 

He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor 105 

In which addition, hail, most worthy thane! 
For it is thine. 

Ban. What, can the devil speak true? 

Macb. The thane of Cawdor lives : why do you dress me 
In borrow'd robes? 

Ang. Who was the thane lives yet ; 

But under heavy judgment bears that life iio 

Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined 
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel 
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both 
He laboured in his country's wreck, I know not ; 
But treasons capital, confessed and proved, \\\ 

Have overthrown him. 

Macb. [Asz'de.] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor ! 

The greatest is behind. [To Ross and Angus."] Thanks fo! 

your pains. 
[ To Ban.] Do you not hope your children shall be kings. 
When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me 
Promised no less to them? 

Ban. That trusted home 120 

Might yet enkindle you unto the crown. 
Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 't is strange : 
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm. 
The instruments of darkness tell us truths, 
Win us with honest trifles, to betray 's 125 

In deepest consequence. 
Cousins, a word, I pray you. 

Macb. [Aside.] Two truths are told, 

As happy prologues to the swelling act 
Of the imperial theme. — I thank you, gentlemen. 
[Aside.] This supernatural soliciting 13c 

Cannot be ill, cannot be good : if ill. 
Why hath it given me earnest of success, 
Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor: 
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion 
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair 1 35 

And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, 



Scene 4.] MACBETH. 21 

Against the use of nature? Present fears 

Are less than horrible imaginings : 

My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, 

Shakes so my single state of man that function 140 

Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is 

But what is not. 

Ban. Look, how our partner 's rapt. 

Macb. \Aside^ If chance will have me king, why, chance \ 
may crown me, 
Without my stir. 

Ban, New honours come upon him. 

Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould 145 
But with the aid of use. 

Macb. [Aside.] Come what come may. 

Time and the hour runs through the roughest day. 

Bau. Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure. 

Macb. Give me your favour : my dull brain was wrought 
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains 1 50 

Are registered where every day I turn 
The leaf to read them. Let us toward the king. 
Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time. 
The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak 
Our free hearts each to other. 

Ban. Very gladly. 1 5 5 

Macb, Till then, enough. Come, friends. [Exeunt. 

Scene IV. Forres. The palace. 

Flourish. Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, 
Lennox, and Attendants. 

Dun. Is execution done on Cawdor.'* Are not 
Those in commission yet retum'd? 

Mai. My liege, 

They are not yet come back. But I have spoke 
With one that saw him die : who did report 
That very frankly he confess'd his treasons, 5 

Implored your highness* pardon and set forth 
A deep repentance : nothing in his life 
Became him like the leaving it ; he died 
As one that had been studied in his death 
To throw away the dearest thing he owed, 10 

As 't were a careless trifle. 

Dun. There 's no art 

To find the mind's construction in the face: 



22 MACBETH. [Act L 

He was a gentleman on whom I built 
An absolute trust. 

Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus. 

O worthiest cousin ! 
The sin of my ingratitude even now 15 

Was heavy on me : thou art so far before 
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow 
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved, 
That the proportion both of thanks and payment 
Might have been mine ! only I have left to say, 20 

More is thy due than more than all can pay. 

Macb, The service and the loyalty I owe, 
In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part 
Is to receive our duties ; and our duties 
Are to your throne and state children and servants, 25 

Which do but what they should, by doing every thing 
Safe toward your love and honour. 

Dun, Welcome hither : 

I have begun to plant thee, and will labour 
To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo, 
That hast no less deserved, nor must be known 30 

No less to have done so, let me infold thee 
And hold thee to my heart. 

Ban. There if I grow. 

The harvest is your own. 

Dun. My plenteous joys. 

Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves 
In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes, 35 

And you whose places are the nearest, know 
We will establish our estate upon 
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter 
The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must 
Not unaccompanied invest him only, 40 

But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine 
On all deservers. From hence to Inverness, 
And bind us further to you. 

Macb. The rest is labour, which is not used for you : 
Pll be myself the harbinger and make joyful 45 

The hearing of my wife with your approach ; 
So humbly take my leave. 

Dun. My worthy Cawdor 1 

Macb, [Aside] The Prince of Cumberland ! that is a step 
On which I must fall down, br else o'erleap, 
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires ; 50 



Scene 5.] MACBETH. 23 

Let not light see my black and deep desires : ^ 
The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be, \ 
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see. [Exit 

Dun. True, worthy Banquo ; he is full so valiant, ^' 
And in his commendations I am fed; 55 

It is a banquet to me. Let's after him, 
^Vhose care is gone before to bid us welcome : 
It is a peerless kinsman. [Flourish. Exeunt. 

Scene V. Inverness. MacbeWs castle. 
Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter. 

Lady M. * They met me in the day of success : and I have 

learned by the perfectest report, they have more in them than 

' mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question 

them further, they made themselves air, into which they 

vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came 

missives from the king, who all-hailed me "Thane of Cawdor"; 

by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and 

referred me to the coming on of time, with " Hail, king 

thou shalt be!" This have I thought good to deliver thee, 

my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose 

the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is 

promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.' 12 

Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be 

^AVhat thou art promised : yet do I fear thy nature ; 

^It is too full o' the milk of human kindness ^ 15 

To catch the nearest way?jJthou wouldst be great; 
Art not without ambition, out without 
The illness should attend it : what thou wouldst highly. 
That wouldst thou holily ; wouldst not play false. 
And yet wouldst wrongly win : thou 'Idst have, great Glamis, 
That which cries * Thus thou must do, if thou have it' ; 21 
And that which rather thou dost fear to do 
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither, 
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear; 
And chastise with the valour of my tongue 25 

All that impedes thee from the golden round. 
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem 
To have thee crown'd withal. 

Enter a Messenger. 

What is your tidings? 
Mess. The king comes here to-night. 
Lady M. Thou 'rt mad to say it : 



24 MACBETH. [Act I. 

Is not thy master with him? who, were't so, yy 

Would have infonn'd for preparation. 

Mess, So please you, it is true : our thane is coming : 
One of my fellows had the speed of him. 
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more 
Than would make up his message. 

La^y M, Give him tending ; 35 

He brings great news. \Exit Messenger. 

The raven himself is hoarse 
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan 
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits 
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here. 
And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full 40 

Of direst cruelty ! make thick my blood ; 
Stop up the access and passage to remorse, 
That no compunctious visitings of nature 
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between 
The effect and it ! Come to my woman's breasts, 45 

And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers. 
Wherever in your sightless substances 
You wait on nature's mischief ! Come, thick night. 
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell. 
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, 50 

Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, 
Tocry* Hold, hold!' 

Enter Macbeth. 

Great Glamis 1 worthy Cawdor ! 
Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter ! 
Thy letters have transported me beyond 
This ignorant present, and I feel now 5 5 

The future in the instant. 

Macb, My dearest love, 

Duncan comes here to-night. 

Lady M, And when goes hence? 

Macb, To-morrow, as he purposes. 

Lady M. O, never 

Shall sun that morrow see ! 

Your face, my thane, is as a book where men 60 

May read strange matters. To beguile the time, 
Look like the time ; bear welcome in your eye, 
Your hand, your tongue : look like the innocent flower, 
But be the serpent under 't. He that 's coming 
Must be provided for : and you shall put 65 

This night's great business into my dispatch ; 




Scene 6.] MACBETH. 25 

Which shall to all our nights and days to come 
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom. 

Macb. We will speak furthers— 

Lady M, Only look up clear ; 

To alter favour ever is to fear ; 70 

Leave all the rest to me. [Exeunt 

Scene VI. Before MacbetHs castle. 

Hautboys and torches. Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donal- 
BAiN, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus, and 
Attendants. 

Dun, This castle hath a pleasant seat ; the air 
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself 
Unto our gentle senses. 

Ban, This guest of summer, 

The temple-haunting martlet, does approve. 
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath ^ 5 

Smells wooingly here : no jutty, frieze, 
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird 
Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle : 
Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, 
The air is delicate. 

Enter Lady Macbeth. 

Dun. See, see, our honoured hostess! 10 

The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, 
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you 
How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains. 
And thank us for your trouble. 

Lady M. All our service 

In every point twice done and then done double 1 5 

Were poor and single business to contend 
Against those honours deep and broad wherewith 
Your majesty loads our house : for those of old. 
And the late dignities heap'd up to them, 
We rest your hermits. 

Dun, Where's the thane of Cawdor? 20 

We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose 
To be his purveyor : but he rides well ; 
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him 
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess, 
We are your guest to-night. 

Lady M, Your servants ever 25 

Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt. 



26 MACBETH. [Act 

To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, 
Still to return your own. 

Dun, Give me your hand ; 

Conduct me to mine host : we love him highly, 
And shall continue our graces towards him. 
By your leave, hostess. \Exeui 

Scene VII. Macbeth s castle. 

Hautboys and torches. Enter a Sewer and divers Servai 
with dishes and service and pass over the stage. Th 
enter Macbeth. 

Macb. If it were done when *t is done, then 't were weU 
It were done quickly: if the assassination 
Could trammel up the consequence, and catch 
With his surcease success ; tnat but this blow 
Might be the be-all and the end-all here, 
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, 
We 'Id jump the life to come. But in these cases 
We still have judgment here ; that we but teach 
Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return 
To plague the inventor : this even-handed justice lo 

Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice 
To our own lips. He 's here in double trust ; 
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject. 
Strong both against the deed ; then, as his host, 
Who should against his murderer shut the door, 15 

Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan 
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been 
So clear in his great office, that his virtues 
Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against 
The deep damnation of his taking-ofF; 20 

And pity, like a naked new-bom babe, 
Stridmg the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed 
Upon the sightless couriers of the air. 
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye. 
That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur 25 

To prick the sides of my intent, but only 
Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself 
And falls on the other. 

Enter Ladt Macbeth. 

How now! what news? 
Lady il/. He has almost supp'd: why have you left the 
chamber? 



Scene 7.] MACBETH. 27 

Macb. Hath he ask'd for me ? 

Lady M, Know you not he has? 30 

Macb. We will proceed no further in this business : 
He hath honour'd me of late ; and I have bought 
Golden opinions from all sorts of people, 
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, 
Not cast aside so soon. 

Lady M. Was the hope drunk 35 

Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since? 
And Avakes it now, to look so green and pale 
At what it did so freely? From this time 
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard 
To be the same in thine own act and valour 40 

As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that 
Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life. 
And live a coward in thine own esteem, 
Letting ' I dare not ' wait upon * I would ', 
Like the poor cat i' the adage? 

Macb. Prithee, peace: 45 

I dare do all that may become a man ; 
Who dares do more is none. 

Lady M. What beast was 't, then, 

That made you break this enterprise to me? 
When you durst do it, then you were a man ; 
And, to be more than what you were, you would 50 

Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place 
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both : 
They have made themselves, and that their fitness now 
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know 
How tender \ is to love the babe that milks me : 55 

I would, while it was smiling in my face. 
Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums. 
And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you 
Have done to this. 

Macb. If we should fail? 

Lady M. We fail ! 

But screw your courage to the sticking-place, 60 

And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep — 
Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey 
Soundly invite him — his two chamberlains 
Will I with wine and wassail so convince 
That memory, the warder of the brain, 65 

Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason 
A limbeck only : when in swinish sleep 
Their drenched natures lie as in a death. 



28 MACBETH. [Act II. 

What cannot you and I perform upon 

The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon 70 

His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt 

Of our great quell? 

Macb, Bring forth men-children only ; 

For thy undaunted mettle should compose 
Nothing but males. Will it not be received, 
When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two 75 

Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, 
That they have done't? 

Lady J/. Who dares receive it other. 

As we shall make our grief and clamour roar 
Upon his death? 

Macb. I am settled, and bend up 

Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. 80 

Away, and mock the time with fairest show : 
False face must hide what the false heart doth know. 

\Exeunt. 



ACT II. 

Scene I. Court of MacbeWs castle. 
Enter Banquo, and Fleance bearing a torch before him. 

Ban, How goes the night, boy? 

Fie. The moon is down ; I have not heard the clock. 

Ban. And she goes down at twelve. 

Fie. I take 't, 't is later, sir. 

Ban. Hold, take my sword. There 's husbandry in heaven ; 
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too. 5 

A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, 
And yet I would not sleep : merciful powers. 
Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature 
Gives way to in repose ! 

Enter Macbeth, and a Servant with a torch. 

Give me my sword. 
Who's there? 10 

Macb. A friend. 

Ban. What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed: 
He hath been in unusual pleasure, and 
Sent forth great largess to your offices. 
This diamond he greets your wife withal, 1 5 



\ 



Scene i.] MACBETH. 29 

By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up 
In measureless content. 

Macb. Being unprepared, 

Our will became the servant to defect ; 
Which else should free have wrought. 

Ban. All 's well. 

I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters : 20 

To you they have showed some truth. 

Macb. I think not of them 

Yet, when ^e can entreat an hour to serve, 
We would spend it in some words upon that business, 
If you would grant the time. 

Ban. At your kindest leisure. 

Macb. If you shall cleave to my consent, when 't is, 25 

It shall make honour for you. 

Ban. So I lose none 

In seeking to augment it, but still keep 
My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, 
I shall be counseled. 

Macb. Good repose the while ! 

Ban. Thanks, sir : the like to you ! 30 

[Exeunt Banquo and Fleance. 

Macb. Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready. 
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed. \Exit Servant. 
I s this a dagger which I see before me, 
The handle toward my hand.'' Come, let me clutch thee. 
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still. 35 

Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible 
To feeling as to sight? or art thou but 
A dagger of the mind, a false creation. 
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain? 
I see thee yet, in form as palpable 40 

As this which now I draw. 
Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going ; 
And such an instrument I was to use. 
Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses. 
Or else worth all the rest ; I see thee still, 45 

And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, 
Which was not so before. There 's no such thing : 
It is the bloody business which informs 
Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one-half world 
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse 50 

The curtained sleep ; witchcraft celebrates 
Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, 
AlarumM by his sentmel, the wolf, 



1 



30 MACBETH. [Act II. 

Whose howl 's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace, 
Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth, 55 

Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear 
Thy very stones prate of my whereabout. 
And take the present horror from the time, 
Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives : 
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives. 60 

[A bell rings. 
I go, and it is done ; the bell invites me. 
Hear it not, Duncan ; for it is a knell 
That summons thee to heaven or to hell. \Exit 

Scene II. The same. 
Enter Lady Macbeth. 

Lady M. That which hath made them drunk hath made 

me bold ; 
What hath quench'd them hath given me fire. Hark ! Peace! 
It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman, 
Which gives the stem'st good-night. He is about it : 
The doors are open ; and the surfeited grooms 5 

Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their 

possets, 
That death and nature do contend about them, 
Whether they\live or die. 

Enter Macbeth above ^ for a moment, 

Macb. Who's there? what, ho! 

Lady M. Alack, I am afraid they have awaked, 10 

And 't is not done. The attempt and not the deed 
Confounds us. Hark ! I laid their daggers ready; 
He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled 
My father as he slept, I had done 't. 

Enter Macbeth. 

My husband ! 
Macb. I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise? 
Lady M. I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. 16 
Macb. Did not you speak? 
Lady M, When? Now? 
Macb. As I descended. 

Lady M. I! 
Mcu:b. Hark! 
Who lies i' the second chamber? 



Scene 2.] MACBETH. 31 

Lcuiy M. Donalbain. 20 

Macb. This is a sorry sight. [Looking on his hands. 

Lady M. A foohsh thought, to say a sorry sight. 

Macb. There 's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried 
'Murder!' 
That they did wake each other : I stood and heard them : 
But they did say their prayers, and address'd them 25 

Again to sleep. 

iMdy M. There are two lodged together. 

Macb, One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other; 
As they had seen me with these hangman's hands. 
Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen', 
When they did say ' God bless us!' 

Lcuiy M. Consider it not so deeply. 

Macb. But wherefore could not I pronounce 'Amen'? 31 
I had most need of blessing, and ' Amen ' 
Stuck in my throat. 

LMcfy M. These deeds must not be thought 

After these ways ; so, it will make us mad. 

Macb, Methought I heard a voj/fft, cry ' Sleep no more ! 35 
Macbeth does murder sleep', tj^innocent sleep, 
Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleave of care, 
The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath. 
Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, 
Chief nourisher in life's feast, — 

Lcuiy M, What do you mean? 

Macb, Still it cried * Sleep no more !' to all the house : 
* Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor # 

Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more'. 

Lady M, Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane. 
You do unbend your noble strength, to think 45 

So brainsickjy of things. Go get some water, j^m 

And wash this filthy witness from your hand. ^r^ 

Why did you bring these daggers from the place? 
They must lie there : go carry them ; and smear 
The sleepy grooms with blood. 

Macb, I '11 go no more : 50 

I am afraid to think what I have done ; 
Look on 't again I dare not. 

Lcuiy M, Infirm of purpose ! 

Give me the daggers : the sleeping and the dead 
Are but as pictures : 't is the eye of childhood 
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed, 55 

I '11 gild the faces of the grooms withal ; 
For it must seem their guilt. [Exit, Knocking within. 




32 MACBETH. [Act IL 

Macb, Whence is that knocking? 

How is't with me, when every noise appals me? 
What hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes. 
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood 60 

Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather 
The multitudinous seas incarnadine, 
Making the green one red. 

Re-enter Lady Macbeth. 

Lady M. My hands are of your colour ; but I shame 
To wear a heart so white. [Knocking withinJ] I hear a 
knocking 65 

At the south entry : retire we to our chamber : 
A little water clears us of this deed : 
How easy is it, then ! Your constancy 
Hath left you unattended. [Knocking within^ Hark ! more 

knocking. 
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us, 70 

And show us to be watchers. Be not lost 
So poorly in your thoughts. 
Macb. To know my deed, 't were best not know myself. 

[Knocking tuithin. 
Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst ! 

[Exeunt, 

Scene HI. The same. 

Knocking within. Enter a Porter. 

Porter. Here 's a knocking indeed ! If a man were porter 
of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key. [Knocking 
within.] Knock, knock, knock ! Who 's there, i* the name 
of Beelzebub? Here's a farmer, that hanged himself on the 
expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow 
about you ; here you '11 sweat for 't. [Knocking within."] 
Knock, knock ! Who 's there, in the other devil's name? 
P^aith, here's an equivocator, that could swear in both the 
scales against either scale; who committed treason enough 
for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven : O, come 
in, equivocator. [Knocking within.] Knock, knock, knock ! 
Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, 
for stealing out of a French hose : come in, tailor ; here you 
may roast your goose. [Knocking within.] Knock, knock ; 
never at quiet! What are you? But this place is too cold 
for hell. I '11 devil-porter it no further ; I had thought to 
have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 33 

to the everlasting bonfire. {Knocking within?^ Anon, anon ! 
I pray you, remember the porter. [Opens the gate. 

Enter Macduff and Lennox. 

Macd, Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed, 20 

That you do lie so late? 

Port, 'Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock. 
Macd. Is thy master stirring? 

Enter Macbeth. 

Our knocking has awaked him ; here he comes. 

I^n. Good morrow, noble sir. 

Macb. Good morrow, both. 25 

Macd. Is the king stirring, worthy thane? 

Macb. Not yet. 

Macd. He did command me to call timely on him : 
I have almost slipped the hour. 

Macb. I '11 bring you to him. 

Macd. I know this is a joyful trouble to you ; 
But yet 't is one. 30 

Macb. The labour we delight in physics pain. 
This is the door. 

Macd. I '11 make so bold to call. 

For 't is my limited service. \Exit. 

I^n. Goes the king hence to-day? 

Macb. He does : he did appoint so. 

Len. The night has been unruly : where we lay, 35 

Our chimneys were blown down ; and, as they say, 
Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death, 
And prophesying with accents terrible 
Of dire combustion and confused events 
New hatch'd to the woeful time : the obscure bird 40 

Clamour'd the livelong night : some say, the earth 
Was feverous and did shake. 

Macb. 'T was a rough night. 

Len. My young remembrance cannot parallel 
A fellow to it. 

Re-enter Macduff. 

Macd. O horror, horror, horror ! Tongue nor heart 45 
Cannot conceive nor name thee ! 

^^^' I What 's the matter? 

Macd. Confusion now hath made his masterpiece ! 
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope 

(M113) C 



34 MACBETH. [Act II. 

The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence 
The life o' the building ! 

Macb. What is 't you say? the life? 50 

Len, Mean you his majesty? 

Macd, Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight 
With a new Gorgon : do not bid me speak ; 
See, and then speak yourselves. 

[Exeunt Macbeth and Lennox. 
Awake, awake ! 
Ring the alarum-bell. Murder and treason ! 55 

Banquo and Donalbain I Malcolm ! awake ! 
Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit, 
And look on death itself! up, up, and see 
The great doom's image ! Malcolm ! Banquo ! \ 

As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites, 60 

To countenance this horror ! Ring the bell. \Bell rings. 

Enter Lady Macbeth. 

Lady M, What 's the business. 
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley 
The sleepers of the house? speak, speak 1 

Macd. O gentle lady, 

T is not for you to hear what I can speak : 65 

The repetition, in a woman's ear, 
Would murder as it fell. 

Enter Banquo. 

O Banquo, Banquo, 
Our royal master 's murder'd ! 

Lady M. Woe, alas ! 

What, in our house ? 

Ban, Too cruel any where. 

Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself, 70 

And say it is not so. 

Re-enter Macbeth and Lennox, with Ross. 

Macb, Had I but died an hour before this chance, 
I had lived a blessed time ; for, from this instant. 
There's nothing serious in mortality: 
All is but toys : renown and grace is dead ; 
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees 
Is left this vault to brag of. 

Enter Malcolm and Donalbain. 

Don. What is amiss? 

Macb. You are, and do not know *t ; 



I 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 3S 

The spring, the nead, the fountain of your blood 

Is stopp'd ; the very source of it is stopp'd 80 

Macd. Your royal father 's murdered. 

MaL O, by whom? 

Len, Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't : 
Their hands and faces were all badged with blood ; 
So were their daggers, which unwiped we found 
Upon their pillows: 85 

They stared, and were distracted ; no man's life 
Was to be trusted with them. 

Macb, O, yet I do repent me of my fury. 
That I did kill them. 

Macd. Wherefore did you so? 

Mach, Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, 
Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man : 91 

The expedition of my violent love 
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, 
His silver skin laced with his golden blood; 
And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature 95 

For ruin's wasteful entrance : there, the murderers, 
Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers 
Unmannerly breech'd with gore : who could refrain, 
That had a heart to love, and in that heart 
Courage to make's love known? 

Lady M, Help me hence, ho 1 100 

Macd, Look to the lady. 

MaL [Aside to Don.] Why do we hold our tongues. 
That most may claim this argument for ours? 

Don. [Aside to Ma/.] What should be spoken here, where 
our fate. 
Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us? 
Let 's away ; 105 

Our tears are not yet brew'd. 

Mat. [Aside to Don.] Nor our strong sorrow 
Upon the foot of motion. 

Ban. Look to the lady : 

[L{zdy Macdeth is carried out. 
And when we have our naked frailties hid, 
That suffer in exposure, let us meet, 

And question this most bloody piece of work, 1 10 

To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us : 
In the great hand of God I stand ; and thence 
Against the undivulged pretence I fight 
Of treasonous malice. 

Macd And so do I. 



36 MACBETH. [Act II. 

AIL So all. 

Macb, Let *s briefly put on manly readiness, 1 1 5 

And meet i' the hall together. 

All. Well contented. 

[Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain, 

Mai. What will you do? Let's not consort with them: 
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office 
Which the false man does easy. I '11 to England. 

Don. To Ireland, I ; our separate fortime 120 

Shall keep us both the safer : where we are, 
There 's daggers in men's smiles : the near in blood. 
The nearer bloody. 

MaL This murderous shaft that 's shot 

Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way 
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse; 125 

And let us not be dainty of leave-taking, 
But shift away : there 's warrant in that theft 
Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left. {Exeunt. 

Scene IV. Outside Macbeth s castle. 
Enter Ross and an old Man. 

Old M, Threescore and ten I can remember well : 
Within the volume of which time I have seen 
Hours dreadful and things strange ; but this sore night 
Hath trifled former knowings. 

Ross. Ah, good father, 

Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act, 5 

Threaten his bloody stage : by the clock, 't is day. 
And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp : 
Is 't night's predominance, or the day's shame. 
That darkness does the face of earth entomb, 
When living light should kiss it? 

Old M. 'T is unnatural, 10 

Even like the deed that 's done. On Tuesday last, 
A falcon, towering in her pride of place. 
Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd. 

Ross. And Duncan's horses — a thing most strange and 
certain — 
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, 1 5 

Tum'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out. 
Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make 
War with mankind. 

Old M. T is said they eat each other. 



Act III. Sc. I.] MACBETH. 37 

Ross. They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes 
That look'd upon 't. Here comes the good Macduff. 20 

Enter MACDUFF. 

How goes the world, sir, now? 

Macd. Why, see you not? 

Ross, Is't known who did this more than bloody deed? 

Macd, Those that Macbeth hath slain. 

Ross. Alas, the day ! 

What good could they pretend? 

Macd They were suborn'd : 

Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons, 25 

Are stol'n away and fled ; which puts upon them 
Suspicion of the deed. 

Ross. 'Gainst nature still ! 

Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up 
Thine own life's means ! Then 't is most like 
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth. 30 

Macd. He is already named, and gone to Scone 
To be invested. 

Ross. Where is Duncan's body? 

Macd. Carried to Colmekill, 
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors. 
And guardian of their bones. 

Ross. Will you to Scone? 35 

Macd No, cousin, I '11 to Fife. 

Ross. Well, I will thither. 

Macd. Well, may you see things well done there : adieu ! 
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new ! 

Ross. Farewell, father. 

Old M. God's benison go with you ; and with those 40 
That would make good of bad, and friends of foes ! {Exeunt. 



ACT III. 

Scene I. Forres. The palace. 
Enter Banquo. 

Ban^ Thou hast it now : king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, 
As the weird women promised, and, I fear. 
Thou pla/dst most foully for't: yet it was said 
It should not stand in thy posterity. 



38 MACBETH. [Act III. 

But that myself should be the root and father 5 

Of many kings. If there come truth from them — 

As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine — 

Why, by the verities on thee made good. 

May they not be my oracles as well, 

And set me up in hope? But hush ! no more. 10 

Sennet sounded. Enter Macbeth, as king. Lady Macbeth, 
as queen^ Lennox, Ross, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants. 

Macb. Here 's our chief guest 

Lady M. If he had been forgotten, 

It had been as a gap in our great feast. 
And all-thing unbecoming. 

Macb. To-night we hold a solemn supper, sir, 
And I '11 request your presence. 

Ban. Let your highness 1 5 

Command upon me ; to the which my duties 
Are with a most indissoluble tie 
For ever knit 

Macb. Ride you this afternoon? 

Ban. Ay, my good lord. 20 

Macb. We should have else desired your good advice, 
Which still hath been both grave and prosperous. 
In this day's council ; but we'll take to-morrow. 
Is't far you ride? 

Ban. As far, my lord, as will fill up the time 25 

'Twixt this and supper : go not my horse the better, 
I must become a borrower of the night 
For a dark hour or twain. 

Macb. Fail not our feast 

Ban. My lord, I will not 

Macb. We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd 30 

In England and in Ireland, not confessing 
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers 
With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, 
When therewithal we shall have cause of state 
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse : adieu, 35 

Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you? 

Ban. Ay, my good lord : our time does call upon 's. 

Macb. I wish your horses swift and sure of foot ; 
And so I do commend you to their backs. 
Farewell. [Exit Banquo. 40 

Let every man be master of his time 
Till seven at night : to make society 
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself 



Scene i.] MACBETH. 39 

Till supper-time alone : while then, God be with you ! 

[Exeunt all but Macbeth^ and an attendant. 
Sirrah, a word with you : attend those men 45 

Our pleasure? 

Atten, They are, my lord, without the palace gate. 

Macb. Bring them before us. \Exit Attendant, 

To be thus is nothing. 
But to be safely thus. — Our fears in Banquo 
Stick deep ; and in his royalty of nature 50 

Reigns that which would be fear'd : 't is much he dares ; 
And, to that dauntless temper of his mind, 
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour 
To act in safety. There is none but he 
Whose being I do fear: and, under him, 55 

My Genius is rebuked ; as, it is said, 
Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters 
When first they put the name of king upon me, 
And bade them speak to him : then prophet-like 
They hail'd him father to a line of kings : 60 

Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, 
And put a barren sceptre in my gripe. 
Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, 
No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so. 
For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind ; 65 

For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd ; 
Put rancours in the vessel of my peace 
Only for them ; and mine eternal jewel 
Given to the conamon enemy of man, 

To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings ! 70 

Rather than so, come fate into the list, 
And champion me to the utterance I Who 's there ? 

Re-enter Attendant, with two Murderers. 

Now go to the door, and stay there till we call. 

\Exit Attendant, 
Was it not yesterday we spoke together? 

First Mur, It was, so please your highness. 

Macb. Well then, now 

Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know 76 

That it was he in the times past which held you 
So under fortune, which you thought had been 
Our innocent self : this I made good to you 
In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you, 80 

How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments, 
Who wrought with them, and all things else that might 



40 MACBETH. [Act III. 

To half a soul and to a notion crazed 
Say * Thus did Banquo '. 

First MuK You made it knowTi to us. 

Macb. I did so, and went further, which is now 85 

Our point of second meeting. Do you find 
Your patience so predominant in your nature 
That you can let this go? Are you so gospell'd 
To pray for this good man and for his issue. 
Whose heavy hand hath boVd you to the grave 90 

And beggar'd yours for ever? 

First Mur, We are men, my liege. 

Macb, Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men ; 
As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, 
Shoughs, water-rugs and demi- wolves are clept 
All by the name of dogs : the valued file 95 

Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, 
The housekeeper, the hunter, every one 
According to the gift which bounteous nature 
Hath in him closed, whereby he does receive 
Particular addition, from the bill 100 

That writes them all alike : and so of men 
Now, if you have a station in the file, 
Not in the worst rank of manhood, say it ; 
And I will put that business in your bosoms. 
Whose execution takes your enemy off, 105 

Grapples you to the heart and love of us, 
Who wear our health but sickly in his life, ' 

Which in his death were perfect. 

Sec, Mur, I am one, my liege, 

Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world 
Have so incensed that I am reckless what 1 10 

I do to spite the world. 

First Mur, And I another 

So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune, 
That I would set my life on any chance. 
To mend it, or be nd on 't. 

Macb. Both of you 

Know Banquo was your enemy. 

Both Mur, True, my lord. 115 

Macb, So is he mine ; and in such bloody distance, 
That every minute of his being thrusts 
Against my nearest of life : and though I could 
With barefaced power sweep him from my sight 
And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, 120 

For certain friends that are both his and mine, 



Scene 2.] MACBETH. 41 

Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall 

Wlio I myself struck down : and thence it is, 

That I to your assistance do make love, 

Masking the business from the common eye 125 

For sundry weighty reasons. 

Sec. Mur. We shall, my lord, 

Perform what you command us. 

First Mur. Though our lives — 

Macb. Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour 
at most 
I will advise you where to plant yourselves ; 
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time, 1 30 

The moment on 't ; for ^t must be done to-night, 
And something from the palace ; always thought 
That I require a clearness : and with him — 
To leave no rubs nor botches in the work — 
Fleance his son, that keeps him company, 135 

Whose absence is no less material to me 
Than is his father's, must embrace the fate 
Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart : 
I '11 come to you anon. 

Both Mur. We are resolved, my lord. 

Macb. I'll call upon you straight: abide within. 140 

[Exeunt Murderers. 
It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul's flight. 
If it find heaven, must find it out to-night. {Exit. 

Scene II. The palace. 
Enter Lady Macbeth and a Servant 

Lculy M. Is Banquo gone from court? 

Serv. Ay, madam, but returns again to-night. 

Lady M. Say to the king, I would attend his leisure 
For a few words. 

Serv. Madam, I will. [Exzt. 

Lady M. Nought 's had, all 's spent, 

Where our desire is got without content : 5 

'T is safer to be that which we destroy 
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy. 

Enter Macbeth. 

How now, my lord ! why do you keep alone. 
Of sorriest fancies your companions making, 
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died 10 



42 MACBETH. [Act III. 

With them they think on? Things without all remedy 
Should be without regard : what 's done is done. 

Macb. We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it : 
She '11 close and be herself, whilst our poor malice 
Remains in danger of her former tooth. 15 

But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, 
Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep 
In the affliction of these terrible dreams 
That shake us nightly : better be with the dead, 
Whom we, to gain our place, have sent to peace, 20 

Than on the torture of the mind to lie 
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave ; 
After life's fitful fever he sleeps well ; 
Treason has done his worst : nor steel, nor poison, 
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, 25 

Can touch him further. 

Lady M, Come on ; 

Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks ; 
Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night. 

Macb. So shall I, love; and so, 1 pray, be you: 
Let your remembrance apply to Banquo ; 30 

Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue : 
Unsafe the while, that we 

Must lave our honours in these flattering streams, 
And make our faces vizards to our hearts. 
Disguising what they are. 

Lady M. You must leave this. 3$ 

Macb^ O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife! 
Thou know'st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives. 

Lady M. But in them nature's copy 's not eteme. 

Macb. There 's comfort yet ; they are assailable ; 
Then be thou jocund : ere the bat hath flown 40 

His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons 
The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums 
Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done 
A deed of dreadful note. 

Lady M. What 's to be done? 

Macb. Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, 45 
Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night. 
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; 
And with thy bloody and invisible hand 
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond 
Which keeps me pale ! Light thickens ; and the crow 50 
Makes wing to the rooky wood : 
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse ; 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 43 

Whiles night's black agents to their preys do rouse. 
Thou marveirst at my words : but hold thee still : 
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill. 55 

So, prithee, go with me. [Exeunt, 

SCBN E I II . A park near the palace. 
Enter three Murderers. 

First Mur. But who did bid thee join with us.^ 

Third Mur. Macbeth. 

Sec. Mur. He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers 
Our offices and what we have to do 
To the direction just. 

First Mur. Then stand with us. 

The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day : 5 

Now spurs the lated traveller apace 
To gain the timely inn ; and near approaches 
The subject of our watch 

Third Mur. Hark ! I hear horses. 

Ban. [ Within."] Give us a light there, ho ! 

Sec, Mur. Then 't is he : the rest 

That are within the note of expectation 10 

Already are i' the court. 

First Mur. His horses go about. 

Third Mur. Almost a mile : but he does usually, 
So all men do, from hence to the palace gate 
Make it their walk. 

Sec. Mur. A light, a light ! 

Enter Banquo and Fleance with a torch. 

Third Mur. 'T is he. 

First Mur. Stand to 't. 15 

Ban. It will be rain to-night. 

First Mur. Let it come down. 

[They set upon Banqua. 

Ban. O, treachery ! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly ! 
Thou mayst revenge. O slave ! [Dies. Fleance escapes. 

Third Mur. Who did strike out the light? 

First Mur. Was 't not the way? 

Third Mur. There 's but one down ; the son is fled. 

Sec. Mur. We have lost 

Best half of our aflair. 2 1 

First Mur. Well, let 's away, and say how much is done. 

[Exeunt.. 



44 MACBETH. [Act III. 

Scene IV. The same. Hall in the Palace. 

A banquet prepared. Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth, 
Ross, Lennox, Lords, and Attendants. 

Macb. You know your own degrees ; sit down : at first 
And last the hearty welcome. 

Lords. Thanks to your majesty. 

Macb. Ourself will mingle with society, 
And play the humble host. 

Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time 5 

We will require her welcome. 

Lady M. Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends ; 
For my heart speaks they are welcome. 

First Murderer appears at the door. 

Macb. See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks. 
Both sides are even : here I '11 sit i' the midst : 10 

Be large in mirth ; anon we '11 drink a measure 
The table round. {Approaching the door.] There 's blood 
upon thy face. 

Mur. 'T is Banquo's then. 

Macb. 'T is better thee without than he within. 
Is he dispatch'd ? 15 

Mur. My lord, his throat is cut ; that I did for him. 

Macb. Thou art the best o' the cut-throats : yet he 's good 
That did the like for Fleance : if thou didst it, 
Thou art the nonpareil. 

Mur. Most royal sir, 

Fleance is 'scaped. 20 

Macb. Then comes my fit again : I had else been perfect, 
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock, 
As broad and general as the casing air: 
But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in 
To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo's safe? 25 

Mur. Ay, my good lord : safe in a ditch he bides, 
With twenty trenched gashes on his head ; 
The least a death to nature. 

McLcb. Thanks for that : 

There the grown serpent lies ; the worm that 's fled 
Hath nature that in time will venom breed, 3^ 

No teeth for the present. Get thee gone : to-morrow 
We '11 hear ourselves again. \Exit Murderer. 

Lady M. My royal lord, 

You do not give the cheer : the feast is sold 
That is not often vouch'd, while 't is a-making, 



Scene 4.] MACBETH. 45 

'Tis given with welcome : to feed were best at home; 35 
From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony ; 
Meeting were bare without it. 

Macb, Sweet remembrancer ! 

Now, good digestion wait on appetite, 
And health on both ! 

Len, May 't please your highness sit. 

\The Ghost of Banquo enters^ and sits in 

MacbetfCs place. 

Macb. Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, 40 
Were the graced person of our Banquo present ; 
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness 
Than pity for mischance ! 

Ross, His absence, sir, 

Lays blame upon his promise. Please 't your highness 
To grace us with your royal company. 45 

Macb. The table 's full. 

Len. Here is a place reserved, sir. 

Mcu:b. Where? 

Len. Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your 
highness.'* 

Macb. Which of you have done this? 

lj)rds. What, my good lord? 

Macb. Thou canst not say I did it : never shake 50 

Thy gory locks at me. 

Ross. Gentlemen, rise; his highness is not well. 

Lady M. Sit, worthy friends : my lord is often thus. 
And hath been from his youth : pray you, keep seat ; 
The fit is momentary ; upon a thought 55 

He will again be well : if much you note him. 
You shall offend him and extend his passion : 
Feed, and regard him not. — Are you a man ? 

Macb. Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that 
Which might appal the devil. 

iMdy M. O proper stuff! 60 

This is the very painting of your fear : 
This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said, 
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts, 
Impostors to true fear, would well become 
A woman's story at a winter's fire, 65 

Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself! 
Why do you make such faces ? When all 's done. 
You look but on a stool. 

Macb. Prithee, see there I behold ! look 1 lo ! how say you ? 
Why, what care I ? If thou canst nod, speak too. 70 



46 MACBETH. [Act III. 

If charnel-houses and our graves must send 

Those that we bury back, our monuments 

Shall be the maws of kites. [Ghost vanishes. 

Lady M, What, quite unmanned in folly? 

Macb, If I stand here, I saw him. 

Lady M. Fie, for shame ! 

Macb. Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, 75 
Ere human statute purged the gentle weal ; 
Ay, and since too, murders have been performed 
Too terrible for the ear : the time has been. 
That, when the brains were out, the man would die, 
And there an end ; but now they rise again, 80 

With twenty mortal murders on their crowns. 
And push us from our stools : this is more strange 
Than such a murder is. 

Lady M, My worthy lord. 

Your noble friends do lack you. 

Macb. I do forget. 

Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends ; 85 

I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing 
To those that know me. Come, love and health to all ; 
Then I '11 sit down. Give me some wine ; fill full. 

Enter Ghost. 

I drink to the -general joy o' the whole table. 

And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss ; 90 

Would he were here ! to all, and him, we thirst. 

And all to all. 

Lords, Our duties, and the pledge. 

Macb. Avaunt ! and quit my sight ! let the earth hide thee I 
Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold ; 
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes 95 

Which thou dost glare with 1 

Lady M. Think of this, good peers. 

But as a thing of custom : 't is no other ; 
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time. 

Macb. What man dare, I dare : 
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear, 100 

The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger ; 
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves 
Shall never tremble : or be alive again. 
And dare me to the desert with thy sword ; 
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me 105 

The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow ! 
Unreal mockery, hence ! \Ghost vanishes^ 



Scene 4.] MACBETH. 47 

Why, so : being gone, 
I am a man again. Pray you, sit still. 

Lady M, Ypu have displaced the mirth, broke the good 
meeting, 
With most admired disorder. 

Macb, Can such things be, no 

And overcome us like a summer's cloud, 
"Without our special wonder? You make me strange 
Even to the disposition that I owe. 
When now I thmk you can behold such sights, 
And keep the natural ruby of your checks, 1 1 5 

W^hen mme is blanch'd with fear. 

Ross. What sights, my lord? 

Lady M. I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse ; 
Question enrages him. At once, good night ; 
Stand not upon the order of your going. 
But go at once. 

Len, Good nighf ; and better health 120 

Attend his majesty ! 

Lady M. A kind good night to all ! 

\Exeu7it all btU Macbeth and Lady M, 
Macb, It will have blood ; they say, blood will have blood : 
Stones have been known to move and trees to speak ; 
Augurs and understood relations have 

By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth 125 
The secret'st man of blood. What is the night ? 

Lady M, Almost at odds with morning, which is which. 
Macb. How sayst thou, that Macduff denies his person 
At our great bidding? 

Lady M. Did you send to him, sir? 

Macb. I hear it by the way ; but I will send : 1 30 

There 's not a one of them but in his house 
I keep a servant fee'd. I will to-morrow. 
And betimes I will, to the weird sisters : 
More shall they speak ; for now I am bent to know. 
By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good, 135 
All causes shall give way : I am in blood 
Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more, 
Returning were as tedious as go o'er : 
Strange things I have in head, that will to hand ; 
Which must be acted ere they may be scanned. 140 

Lady M. You lack the season of all natures, sleep. 
Macb. Come, we '11 to sleep. My strange and self-abuse 
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use : 
We are yet but young in deed. [Exeunt 



4» MACBETH. [Act III. 

QSCENE V. A heath. 
Thunder. Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecate. 

First Witch. Why, how now, Hecate ! you look angerly. 

Hec. Have I not reason, beldams as you are. 
Saucy and overbold? How did you dare 
To trade and traffic with Macbeth 

In riddles and affairs of death ; 5 

And I, the mistress of your charms, 
The close contriver of all harms, 
Was never call'd to bear my part. 
Or show the glory of our art? 

And, which is worse, all you have done 10 

Hath been but for a wayward son. 
Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do 
Loves for his own ends, not for ygu. 
But make amends now : get you gone. 

And at the pit of Acheron 1 5 

Meet me i' the morning : thither he 
Will come to know his destiny : 
Your vessels and your spells provide, 
Your charms and every thing beside. 

I am for the air; this night I '11 spend 20 

Unto a dismal and a fatal end : 
Great business must be wrought ere noon ; 
Upon the comer of the moon 
There hangs a vaf)orous drop profound 

I '11 catch it ere it come to ground : 25 

And that distill'd by magic sleights 
Shall raise such artificial sprites 
As by the strength of their illusion 
Shall draw him on to his confusion : 

He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear 30 

His hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear : 
And you all know, security is mortals' chiefest enemy. 

\Music and a song within; * Come away, come 
away', &c. 
Hark ! I am call'd ; my little spirit, see, 
Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me. \Extt. 

First Witch. Come, let 's make haste ; she '11 soon be back 
again. \Ex€unt^ 



Scene 6.] MACBETH. 49 

Scene VI. Forres. The palace. 
Enter Lennox and another Lord. 

ILen, My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, 
Which can interpret further: only, I say. 
Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan 
Was pitied of Macbeth : marry, he was dead : 
And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late ; 5 

\Vhom, you may say, if 't please you, Fleance kilFd, 
For Fleance fled : men must not walk too late. 
WTio cannot want the thought how monstrous 
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain 

To kill their gracious father? damned fact ! 10 

How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight 
In pious rage the two delinquents tear. 
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? 
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too ; 
For 't would have anger'd any heart alive 1 5 

To hear the men deny H. So that, I say, 
He has borne all things well : and I do think 
That had he Duncan's sons under his key — 
As, an 't please heaven, he shall not — ^they should find 
What 't were to kill a father ; so should Fleance. 20 

But, peace ! for from broad words and 'cause he fiaiPd 
His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear 
Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell 
Wliere he bestows himself? 

Lord. The son of Duncan, 

From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth, 25 

Lives in the English court, and is received 
Of the most pious Edward with such grace 
That the malevolence of fortune nothing 
Takes from his high respect : thither Macduff 
Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid 30 

To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: 
That, by the help of these — with Him above 
To ratify the work — we may again 
Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights. 
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, 35 

Do faithful homage and receive free honours : 
All which we pine for now : and this report 
Hath so exasperate their king that he 
Prepares for some attempt of war. 
Len. Sent he to Macduff? 

(MII8) D 



50 MACBETH. [Act IV. 

Lord. He did : and with an absolute * Sir, not I *, 40 

The cloudy messenger turns me his back, 
And hums, as who should say * You '11 rue the time 
That clogs me with this answer'. 

Lett. And that well might 

Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance 
His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel 45 

Fly to the court of England and unfold 
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing 
May soon return to this our suffering country 
Under a hand accursed ! 

Lord I '11 send my prayers with him. 

\Exeunt, 



ACT IV. 

Scene I. A cavern. In the middle ^ a boiling cauldron. 
Thunder. Enter the three Witches. 

First Witch. Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd. 

Sec. Witch. Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined. 

Third Witch. Harpier cries 'T is time, 't is time. 

First Witch. Round about the cauldron go ; 
In the poison'd entrails throw. 5 

Toad, that under cold stone 
Days and nights has thirty one 
Swelter'd venom sleeping got, 
Boil thou first i' the charmed pot. 

All. Double, double toil and trouble ; 10 

Fire bum, and cauldron bubble. 

Sec. Witch. Fillet of a fenny snake, 
In the cauldron boil and bake ; 
Eye of newt and toe of frog. 

Wool of bat and tongue of dog, 15 

Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, 
Lizard's leg and howlet's wing. 
For a charm of powerful trouble. 
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble. 

All. * Double, double toil and trouble ; 20 

Fire bum, and cauldron bubble. 

Third Witch. Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf 
Witches' mummy, maw and gulf 
Of the ravin'd sait-sea shark. 



Scene i.] MACBETH. 51 

Root of hemlock digged P the dark, 25 

Liver of blaspheming Jew, 

Gall of goat, and slips of yew 

Sliver'd in the moon's eclipse, 

Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, 

Add thereto a tiger's chaudron, 30 

For the ingredients of our cauldron. 

AIL Double, double toil arid trouble ; 
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble. 

Sec, Witch, Cool it with a baboon's blood, 
Then the charm is firm and good. 35 

\_^Enter Hecate to the other three Witches, 

Hec, O, well done ! I commend your pains ; 
And every one shall share i' the gains : 
And now about the cauldron sing. 
Like elves and fairies in a ring. 

Enchanting all that you put in. 40 

[Music and a song: * Black spirits', &c. 

Hecate retires. '^ 
Sec. Witch. By the pricking of my thumbs, 
Something wicked this way comes. 
Open, locks. 
Whoever knocks ! 

Enter MACBETH. 

Macb. How now,. you secret, black, and midnight hags 1 45 
What is't you do? 

All, A deed without a name. 

Macb, I conjure you, by that which you profess, 
Howe'er you conie to know it, answer me : 
Though you untie the winds and let them fight 
Against the churches ; though the yesty waves 50 

Confound and swallow navigation up ; 
Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down ; 
Though castles topple on their warders' heads ; 
Though palaces and pyramids do slope 
Their heads to their foundations ; though the treasure 55 
Of nature's germens tumble all together, 
Even till destruction sicken ; answer me 
To what I ask you. 

First Witch, Speak. 

Sec, Witch, Demand. 

Third Witch. We 'U answer. 



52 MACBETH. [Act IV. 

First Witch, Say if thou'dst rather hear it from our 
mouths, 
Or from our masters? 
Macb. Call 'em ; let me see 'em. 60 

First Witch, Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten 
Her nine farrow ; grease that 's sweaten 
From the murderer's gibbet throw 
Into the flame. 

All, Come, high or low; 

Thyself and office deftly show ! 65 

Thunder^ First Apparition : an armed Head. 

Macb, Tell me, thou unknown power, — 

First Witch, He knows thy thought : 

Hear his speech, but say thou nought. 

First App, Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! beware Mac- 
duff; 
Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough. 

{Descends. 

Macb. Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks ; 70 
Thou hast harp'd my fear aright : but one word more, — 

First Witch, He will not be commanded : here 's another. 
More potent than the first 

Thunder. Second Apparition : a bloody Child, 

Sec. App, Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! 

Macb. Had I three ears, I 'Id hear thee. 75 

Sec, App, Be bloody, bold, and resolute ; laugh to scorn 
The power of man, for none of woman bom 
Shall harm Macbeth. [Descends. 

Macb. Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee? 
But yet I '11 make assurance double sure, 80 

And take a bond of fate : thou shalt not live ; 
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, 
And sleep in spite of thunder. 

Thunder. Third Apparition : a Child crowned^ with a tree 

in his hand 

What is this 
That rises like the issue of a king. 

And wears upon his baby-brow the round 85 

And top of sovereignty? 

All. Listen, but speak not to't. 

Third App. Be lion-mettled, proud ; and take no care 
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are : 



Scene i,] MACBETH. 53 

Macbeth shall never vanquished be until 

Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill 90 

Shall come against him. [^Descends, 

Macb, That will never be : 

"Who can impress the forest, bid the tree 
Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements ! good! 
Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood 
Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth 95 

Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath 
To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart 
Throbs to know one thing : tell me, if your art 
Can tell so much : shall Banquo's issue ever 
Reign in this kingdom? 

All. Seek to know no more. 100 

Macb. I will be satisfied : deny me this, 
And an eternal curse fall on you ! Let me know. 
Why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this? 

\Hautboys. 

First Witch. Show! 
^ Sec. Witch. Show! 105 

Third Witch. Show! 

All. Show his eyes, and grieve his heart ; 
Come like shadows, so depart I 

A show of Eight Kings, the last with a glass in his hand; 

Banquets Ghost following. 

Macb. Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo ; down 1 
Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls. And thy hair, 1 10 

Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first. 
A third is like the former. Filthy hags ! 
Why do you show me this? A fourth ! Start, eyes ! 
What, will the line stretch out till the crack of doom? 
Another yet ! A seventh I 1 '11 see no more : 115 

And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass 
Which shows me many more ; and some I see 
That two-fold balls and treble sceptres carry : 
Horrible sight ! Now, I see 't is true ; 

For the blood-bolter^d Banquo smiles upon me, 120 

And points at them for his. [Apparitions vanish,] What, 
is this so? 

Jj^First Witch. Ay, sir, all this is so : but why 
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly? 
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, 

And show the best of our delights : 125 

I '11 charm the air to give a sound. 



54 MACBETH. [Act IV. 

While you perform your antic round; 
That this great king may kindly say, 
Our duties did his welcome pay. 

[Music, The Witches dance^ and then 'vanish, 

with Hecate^ 
Macb, Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour 
Stand aye accursed in the calendar! 131 

Come in, without there ! 

Enter LENNOX. 

Len, What's your grace's will? 

Macb, Saw you the weird sisters? 

Len. No, my lord. 

Macb, Came they not by you? 

Len, No, indeed, my lord. 

Macb. Infected be the air whereon they ride; 135 

And damn'd all those that trust them ! I did hear 
The galloping of horse : who was 't came by? 

Len. 'T is two or three, my lord, that bring you word 
Macduff is fled to England. 

Macb. Fled to England 1 

Len. Ay, my good lord. 140 

Macb. Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits : 
The flighty purpose never is overtook 
Unless the deed go with it : from this moment 
The very firstlings of my heart shall be 

The firstlings of my hand. And even now, 145 

To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done : 
The castle of Macduff* I will surprise ; 
Seize upon Fife ; give to the edge o' the sword 
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls 
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool ; 1 50 

This deed I '11 do before this purpose cool. 
But no more sights ! — Where are these gentlemen ? 
Come, bring me where they are. \Exeunt. 

Scene II. Fife. Macduff s castle. 
Enter Lady Macduff, her Son, and Ross. 

L. Macd. What had he done, to make him fly the land? 

Ross. You must have patience, madam. 

L. Macd, He had none : 

His flight was madness : when our actions do not, 
Our fears do make us traitors. 



Scene 2.] MACBETH. 55 

Ross. You know not 

"Whether it was his wisdom or his fear. 5 

L. Macd, Wisdom ! to leave his wife, to leave his babes, 
His mansion and his titles in a place 
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not ; 
He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren. 
The most diminutive of birds, will fight, 10 

Her young ones in her nest, against the owl. 
All is the fear and nothing is the love ; 
As little is the wisdom, where the flight 
So runs against all reason. 

Ross. My dearest coz, 

I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, 15 

He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows 
The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further ; 
But cruel are the times, when we are traitors 
And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour 
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, 20 

But float upon a wild and violent sea 
Each way and move. I take my leave of you : 
Shall not be long but I '11 be here again : 
Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward 
To what they were before. My pretty cousin, 25 

Blessing upon you ! 

L, Macd. Father'd he is, and yet he 's fatherless. 

Ross. I am so much a fool, should I stay longer, 
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort: 
I take my leave at once. \Exit. 

JL. Macd. Sirrah, your father's dead: 30 

And what will you do now? How will you live? 

Son. As birds do, mother. 

L, Macd. What, with worms and flies? 

Son, With what I get, I mean ; and so do they. 

JL, Macd. Poor bird ! thou 'Idst never fear the net nor lime, 
The pitfall nor the gin. 35 

Son. Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set 
for. 
My father is not dead, for all your saying. 

Z. Macd. Yes, he is dead: how wilt thou do for a father? 

Son. Nay, how will you do for a husband? 

L. Macd. Why, I can buy me twenty at any market 40 

Son. Then you '11 buy 'em to sell again. 

Z. Macd, Thou speak'st with all thy wit ; and yet, i' faith, 
With wit enough for thee. 

Son, Was my father a traitor, mother? 



56 MACBETH. [Act IV. 

L, Macd. Ay, that he was 45 

Son. What is a traitor? 

L. Macd. Why, one that swears and lies. 

Son. And be all traitors that do so? 

L. Macd. Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be 
hanged. 50 

Son. And must they all be hanged that swear and lie ? 

L. Macd. Every one. 

Son. Who must hang them? 

L. Macd. Why, the honest men. 54 

Son. Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are 
liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up 
them. 

L. Macd. Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how 
wilt thou do for. a father? 59 

Son. If he were dead, you 'Id weep for him: if you would 
not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a new- 
father. 

L. Macd. Poor prattler, how thou talk'st I 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. Bless you, fair dame ! I am not to you known. 
Though in your state of honour I am perfect. 65 

I doubt some danger does approach you nearly : 
If you will take a homely man's advice, 
Be not found here ; hence, with your little ones. 
To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage ; 
To do worse to you were fell cruelty, 70 

Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you ! 
I dare abide no longer. \Exit. 

L. Macd. Whither should I fly? 

I have done no harm. But I remember now 
I am in this earthly world ; where to do harm 
Is often laudable, to do good sometime 75 

Accounted dangerous folly : why then, alas. 
Do I put up that womanly defence. 
To say I have done no harm? 

Enter Murderers. 

What are these faces ? 
First Mur. Where is your husband? 

L. Macd. I hope, in no place so unsanctified 80 

Where such as thou mayst find him. 
First Mur. He's a traitor. 

Son, Thou liest, thou shag-hair'd villain ! 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 57 

First Mur, What, you egg I 

[Stabbing him. 
Young fry of treachery ! 

Son. He has kilPd me, mother : 

Run away, I pray you ! [Dies. 

[Exit Lady Macduff^ crying * Murder !' 
Exeunt Murderers^ following her. 

Scene HI. England. Before the King^s palace. 
Enter MALCOLM and Macduff. 

Afal. Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there 
Weep our sad bosoms empty. 

Macd, Let us rather 

Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men 
Bestride our down-falPn birthdom : each new mom 
New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows 5 

Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds 
As if it felt with Scotland and yelFd out 
Like syllable of dolour. 

Mai. What I believe I '11 wail, 

What know believe, and what I can redress. 
As I shall find the time to friend, I will. 10 

What you have spoke, it may be so perchance. 
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues. 
Was once thought honest : you have loved him well. 
He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young ; but something 
You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom 1 5 

To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb 
To appease an angry god. 

Macd. I am not treacherous. 

Mai. But Macbeth is. 

A good and virtuous nature may recoil 
In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon; 20 
That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose : 
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell : 
Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace. 
Yet grace must still look so. 

Macd. I have lost my hopes. 

Mai. Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. 25 
Why in that rawness left you wife and child. 
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love. 
Without leave-taking? I pray you. 
Let not my jealousies be your dishonours. 



58 



MACBETH. 



[Act IV. 



But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just, 30 

Whatever I shall think. 

Macd. Bleed, bleed, poor country ! 

Great tyranny ! lay thou thy basis sure. 
For goodness dare not check thee : wear thou thy wrongs ; 
The title is affeer'd j Fare thee well, lord : 
I would not be the villain that thou think'st 35 

For the whole space that 's in the tyrant's grasp, 
And the rich East to boot. 

Mai. Be not offended : 

I speak not as in absolute fear of you. 
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke ; 
It weeps, it bleeds ; and each new day a gash 40 

Is added to her wounds: I think withal 
There would be hands uplifted in my right ; 
And here from gracious England have I offer 
Of goodly thousands : but, for all this, 

When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, 45 

Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country 
Shall have more vices than it had before, 
More suffer and more sundry ways than ever. 
By him that shall succeed. 

Macd. What should he be? 

Mai. It is myself I mean : in whom I know 50 

All the particulars of vice so grafted 
That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth 
Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state 
Esteem him as a lamb, being compared 
With my confineless harms. 

Macd. Not in the legions 55 

Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd 
In evils to top Macbeth. 

Mai. I grant him bloody, 

Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful. 
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin 
That has a name : but there 's no bottom, none, (^ 

In my voluptuousness : better Macbeth 
Than such an one to reign. 

Macd. Boundless intemperance 

In nature is a tyranny ; it hath been 
The untimely emptying of the happy throne 
And fall of many kings. 

Mai. With this tnere grows 65 

In my most ill-composed affection such 
A staunchless avarice that, were I king, 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 59 

I should cut off the nobles for their lands, 

Desire his jewels and this other's house : 

And my more-having would be as a sauce 70 

To make me hunger more ; that I should forge 

Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, 

Destroying them for wealth. 

Macd, This avarice 

Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root 
Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been 75 

The sword of our slain kings : yet do not fear ; 
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will. 
Of your mere own : all these are portable, 
With other graces weigh'd. 

Mai. But I have none : the king-becoming graces, 80 

As justice, verity, temperance, stableness. 
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness. 
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, 
I have no relish of them, but abound 

In the division of each several crime, 85 

Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should 
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, 
Uproar the universal peace, confound 
All unity on earth. 

Macd. O Scotland, Scotland ! 

Mai. If such a one be fit to govern, speak : 90 

I am as I have spoken. 

Macd. Fit to govern ! 

No, not to live. O nation miserable, 
With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd. 
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, 
Since that the truest issue of thy throne 95 

By his own interdiction stands accursed. 
And does blaspheme his breed ? Thy royal father 
Was a most sainted king : the queen that bore thee, 
Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, 
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well ! 100 

These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself 
Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast, 
Thy hope ends here ! 

Mai. Macduff, this noble passion, 

Child of integrity, hath from my soul 

Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts 105 

To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth 
By many of these trains hath sought to win me 
Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me 



6o MACBETH. [Act IV. 

From over-credulous haste : but God above I 

Deal between thee and me ! for even now no ' 

I put myself to thy direction, and 

Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure 

The taints and blames I laid upon myself, 

For strangers to my nature. I am yet 

Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, 115 

Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, 

At no time broke my faith, would not betray 

The devil to his fellow, and delight 

No less in truth than life : my first false speaking 

Was this upon myself: what I am truly, 120 

Is thine and my poor country's to command; 

Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, 

Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, 

Already at a point, was setting forth. 

Now we '11 together ; and the chance of goodness 125 

Be like our warranted quarrel ! Why are you silent.^ 

Macd. Such welcome and unwelcome things at once 
'T is hard to reconcile. 

Enter a Doctor. 

Mai. Well; more anon. —Comes the king forth, I pray 
you? 

Doct. Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls 130 

That stay his cure : their malady convinces 
The great assay of art ; but at his touch — 
Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand — 
They presently amend. 

Mai. I thank you, doctor. \Exit Doctor. 

Macd. What 's the disease he means ? 

Mai. TiscalPd the evil: 

A most miraculous work in this good king ; 136 

Which often, since my here-remain in England, 
I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven. 
Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people. 
All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, 140 

The mere despair of surgery, he cures. 
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, 
Put on with holy prayers : and 't is spoken. 
To the succeeding royalty he leaves 

The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, 14$ 

He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, 
And sundry blessings hang about his throne 
That speak him full of grace. 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 61 

Enter Ross. 

Macd. See, who comes here? 

Mai, My countryman ; but yet I know him not. 

Macd. My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither. 1 50 

MaL I know him now. Good God, betimes remove 
The means that makes us strangers ! 

Ross. Sir, amen. 

Macd. Stands Scotland where it did? 

Ross. Alas, poor country ! 

Almost afraid to know itsel£ It cannot 
Be call'd our mother, but our grave ; where nothing, 155 

But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile ; 
Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air 
Are made, not mark'd ; where violent sorrow seems 
A modem ecstasy : the dead man's knell 
Is there scarce ask'd for who ; and good men's lives 160 

Expire before the flowers in their caps, 
Dying or ere they sicken. 

Macd. O, relation 

Too nice, and yet too true ! 

Mai. What's the newest grief? 

Ross. That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker : 
Each minute teems a new one. 

Macd. How does my wife ? 165 

Ross. Why, well. 

Macd. And all my children ? 

Ross. Well too. 

Macd. The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace 

Ross. No ; they were well at peace when I did leave 'em. 

Macd. Be not a niggard of your speech : how goes't? 

Ross. When I came hither to transport the tidings, 170 
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour 
Of many worthy fellows that were out ; 
Which was to my belief witness'd the rather. 
For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot ; 
Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland 175 

Would create soldiers, ms^e our women fight. 
To doff their dire distresses. 

Mai. Be 't their comfort 

We are coming thither : gracious England hath 
Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men ; 
An older and a better soldier none 180 

That Christendom gives out. 

Ross. Would I could answ«: 



62 MACBETH. [Act IV. Sc. 3. 

This comfort with the like ! But I have words 
That would be howPd out in the desert air, 
Where hearing should not latch them. 

Macd. What concern they? 

The general cause? or is it a fee-grief 185 

Due to some single breast? 

Ross, No mind that *s honest 

But in it shares some woe ; though the main part 
Pertains to you alone. 

Macd, If it be mine, 

Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it. 

Ross, Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever, 190 
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound 
That ever yet they heard. 

Macd, Hum ! I guess at it. 

Ross. Your castle is surprised ; your wife and babes 
Savagely slaughtered : to relate the manner, 
Were, on the quarry of these murdered deer, 195 

To add the death of you. 

Mai. Merciful heaven ! 

What, man ! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows ; 
Give sorrow words : the grief that does not speak 
Whispers the o'erfraught heart and bids it break. 

Macd. My children too? 

Ross. Wife, children, servants, all 200 

That could be found. 

Macd. And I must be from thence ! 

My wife kilFd too? 

Ross, I have said. 

Mai. Be comforted : 

Let 's make us medicines of our great revenge, 
To cure this deadly grief. 

Macd, He has no children. All my pretty ones? 305 

Did you say all? O hell-kite ! All? 
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam 
At one fell swoop? 

Mai. Dispute it like a man. 

Macd. I shall do so ; 

But I must also feel it as a man : 210 

I cannot but remember such things were. 
That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on, 
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff, 
They were all struck for thee ! naught that I am. 
Not for their own demerits, but for mine, 21$ 

Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now 1 






Act V. Sc. I.] MACBETH. 63 

Med. Be this the whetstone of your swOrd : let grief 
Convert to anger ; blunt not the heart, enrage it. 

Macd. O, I could play the woman with mine eyes 
And braggart with my tongue I But, gentle heavens, 220 
Cut short all intermission ; front to front 
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; 
Within my sword's length set him ; if he 'scape. 
Heaven forgive him too ! 

Mai. This tune goes manly. 

Come, go we to the king ; our power is ready ; 225 

Our lack is nothing but our leave : Macbeth 
Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above 
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may : 
The night is long that never finds the day. \Exeunt. 



ACT V. 

Scene I. Dunsinane. Ante-room in the castle. 
Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting- Gentlewoman. 

Doct, I have two nights watched with you, but can per- 
ceive no truth in your report. When was it she last walked? 

Gent. Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen 
her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock 
her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon 't, read it, 
afterwards seal it, and again return to bed ; yet all this while 
in a most fast sleep. 7 

Doct. A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once 
the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching ! In this 
slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual 
performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say? 

Gent. That, sir, which I will not report after her. 1 2 

Doct. You may to me : and 't is most meet you should. 

Gent. Neither to you nor any one ; having no witness to 
confirm my speech. 

Enter Lady Macbeth, with a taper. 

Lo you, here she comes ! This is her very guise ; and, upon 
my life, fast asleep. Observe her ; stand close.; 

Doct. How came she by that light? 

Gent. Why, it stood by her : she has light by her continu- 
ally; 'tis her command. 20 



64 MACBETH. [Act V. 

Doct. You see, her eyes are open. 

Gent Ay, but their sense is shut. 

Doct. What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her 
hands. 

Gent. It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus 
washing her hands : I have known her continue in this a 
quarter of an hour. 

Lady M, Yet here 's a spot 

Doct. Hark ! she speaks : I will set down what comes from 
her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly. 30 

Lady M. Out, damned spot ! out, I say ! — One : two : why, 
then 't is time to do 't. — Hell is murky ! — Fie, my lord, fie ! a 
soldier, and afeard.'^ What need we fear who knows it, when 
none can call our power to account? — Yet who would have 
thought the old man to have had so much blood in him. 35 

Doct. Do you mark that? 

Lcuiy M. The thane of Fife had a wife : where is she now? 
— What, will these hands ne'er be clean? — No more o' that, 
my lord, no more o' that : you mar all with this starting. 

Doct. Go to, go to ; you have known what you should not. 

Gent. She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of 
that : heaven knows what she has known. 42 

Lady M. Here's the smell of the blood still: all the per- 
fumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, 
oh! 

Doct, What a sigh is there ! The heart is sorely charged 

Gent. I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the 
dignity of the whole body. 

Doct. WeU, well, well,— 

Gent. Pray God it be, sir. 5^ 

Doct. This disease is beyond my practice : yet I have 
known those which have walked in their sleep who have died 
holily in their beds. 

Lady M. Wash your hands, put on your nightgown ; look 
not so pale. — I tell you yet agam, Banquo 's buried : he can- 
not come out on 's grave. 5^ 

Doct. Even so? 

Lady M. To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate: 
come, come, come, come, give me your hand. What 's done 
cannot be undone. — To bed, to bed, to bed ! \Exit. 

Doct. Will she go now to bed? 61 

Gent. Directly. 

Doct. Foul whisperings are abroad : unnatural deeds 
To breed unnatural troubles : infected minds 
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets : 65 



Scene 2.] MACBETH. 65 

More needs she the divine than the physician. 
God, God forgive us all ! Look after her ; 
Remove from her the means of all annoyance, 
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good nig^ht : 
My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight. 70 

I think, but dare not speak. 
Gent. Good night, good doctor. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene II. The country near Dunsinane. 

Drum and colours. Enter Menteith, Caithness, 
Angus, Lennox, and Soldiers. 

Ment. The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, 
His uncle Siward and the good Macduff : 
Revenges bum in them ; for their dear causes 
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm 
Excite the mortified man. 

Ang. Near Bimam wood 5 

Shall we well meet them ; that way are they coming. 

Caith. Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother? 

Len. For certain, sir, he is not : I have a file 
Of all the gentry : there is Siward's son. 
And many unrough youths that even now 10 

Protest their first of manhood. 

Ment, What does the tyrant ? 

Caith, Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies : 
Some say he 's mad ; others that lesser hate him 
Do call it valiant fiiry : but, for certain, 
He cannot buckle his distempered cause 1 5 

Within the belt of rule. 

Ang. Now does he feel 

His secret murders sticking on his hands ; 
Now, minutely, revolts upbraid his faith-breach; 
Those he commands move only in command, 
Nothing in love : now does he feel his title 20 

Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe 
Upon a dwarfish thief. 

Ment, Who then shall blame 

His pestered senses to recoil and start, 
When all that is within him does condemn 
Itself for being there? 

Caith, Well, march we on, 25 

To give obedience where 't is truly owed : 

(MII8) E 



66 MACBETH. [Act V. 

Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, 
And with him pour we in our country's purge 
Each drop of us. 

Len. Or so much as it needs, 

To dew the sovereign flower and drown Ae weeds. 30 

Make we our march towards Bimam. \Exeunty marching. 

Scene III. Dtinsinane, A room in the castle. 

Enter Macbeth, Doctor, and Attendants. 

Macb. Bring me no more reports ; let them fly all : 
Till Bimam wood remove to Dunsinane, 
I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm? 
Was he not bom of woman? The spirits that know 
All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus : 5 

* Fear not, Macbeth ; no man that 's bom of woman 
Shall e'er have power upon thee '. Then fly, false thanes, 
And mingle with the English epicures : 
The mind I sway by and the heart I bear 
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear. 10 

Enter a Servant. 

The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon ! 
Where got'st thou that goose look? 

SeriK There is ten thousand — 

Macb, Geese, villain? 

Serv, Soldiers, sir. 

Macb. Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear, 
Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch? i5 

Death of thy soul ! those linen cheeks of thine 
Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, wheyface? 

Serv. The English force, so please you. 

Macb. Take thy face hence. \Exit Servant. 

Seyton ! — I am sick at heart, 
When I behold — Seyton, I say ! — This push 20 

Will chair me ever, or disseat me now. 
I have lived long enough : my May of life 
Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf; 
And that which should accompany old age, 
As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends, 25 

I must not look to have ; but, in their stead, 
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath, 
Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not. 
Seyton ! 



J 



Scene 3.] MACBETH. 67 

Enter Seyton. 

Sey. What is your gracious pleasure ? 

Macb. What news more? 

Sey. All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported. 31 

Macb. I '11 fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked. 
Give me mine armour. 

Sey. T is not needed yet. 

Macb. I '11 put it on. 
Send out moe horses ; skirr the country round ; 35 

Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour. 
How does your patient, doctor? 

Doct. Not so sick, my lord, 

As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies, 
That keep her from her rest. 

Macb. Cure her of that. 

Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, 40 

Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, 
Raze out the written troubles of the brain 
And with some sweet oblivious antidote 
Cleanse the stuff 'd bosom of that perilous stuff" 
Which weighs upon the heart? 

Doct. Therein the patient 45 

Must minister to himself 

Mcu:b. Throw physic to the dogs ; I '11 none of it. 
Come, put mine armour on ; give me my staff". 
Seyton, send out. Doctor, the thanes fly from me. 
Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast 50 

The water of my land, find her disease. 
And purge it to a sound and pristine health, 
I would applaud thee to the very echo. 
That should applaud again. — PulPt off, I say. — 
What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug, 55 

Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them? 

Doct. Ay, my good lord ; your royal preparation 
Makes us hear something. 

Macb. Bring it after me. 

I will not be afraid of death and bane, 
Till Bimam forest come to Dunsinane. 60 

Doct. [Aside.] Were I from Dunsinane away and clear, 
Profit again should hardly draw me here. [Exeunt, 



68 MACBETH. [Act V. 

Scene IV. Country near Bimam wood. 

Drum and colours. Enter Malcolm, old Siward and his 
Son, Macduff, Menteith, Caithness, Angus, Len- 
nox, Ross, and Soldiers, marching, 

Mai. Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand 
That chambers will be safe. 

Ment. We doubt it nothing. 

Siw. What wood is this before us.** 

Ment, The wood of Bimam. 

MaJ, Let every soldier hew him down a bough 
And bear't before him ; thereby shall we shadow 5 

The numbers of our host and make discovery 
Err in report of us. 

Soldiers, It shall be done. 

Siw. We learn no other but the confident tyrant 
Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure 
Our setting down before 't 

Mai, *T is his main hope : lo 

For where there is advantage to be given, 
Both more and less have given him the revolt. 
And none serve with him but constrained things 
Whose hearts are absent too. 

Macd, Let our just censures 

Attend the true event, and put we on 15 

Industrious soldiership. 

Siw, The time approaches 

That will with due decision make us know 
What we shall say we have and what we owe. 
Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate. 
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate : 20 

Towards which advance the war. \Exeunt^ marching. 

Scene V. Dunsinane, Within the castle. 

Enter Macbeth, Seyton, and Soldiers, with drum 

and colours, 

Mcu:b, Hang out our banners on the outward walls ; 
The cry is still * They come' : our castle's strength 
Will laugh a siege to scorn : here let them lie 
Till famine and the ague eat them up : 
Were they not forced with those that should be ours, 5 

We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, 






Scene 5.] MACBETH. 69 

And beat them backward home. [A cry of women withitu 

What is that noise? 
Sey. It is the cry of women, my good lord. \Exit 

Macb. I have almost forgot the taste of fears : 

The time has been, my senses would have cool'd 10 

To hear a night-shriek ; and my fell of hair 

Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir 

As life were in 't : I have supp'd full with horrors ; 

Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts, 

Cannot once start me. 

Re-enter Seyton. 

Wherefore was that cry? 15 

Sey. The queen, my lord, is dead. 

Macb. She should have died hereafter ; 
There would have been a time for such a word. 
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, 
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day 20 

To the last syllable of recorded time, 
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools 
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle I 
Life 's but a walking shadow, a poor player 
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage 25 

And then is heard no more : it is a tale 
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, 
Signifying nothing. 

Enter a Messenger. 

Thou comest to use thy tongue ; thy story quickly. 

Mess. Gracious my lord, • 30 

I should report that which I say I saw, 
But know not how to do it. 

Macb. Well, say, sir. 

Mess. As I did stand my watch upon the hill, 
I look'd toward Bimam, and anon, methought, 
The wood began to move. 

McLcb. Liar and slave ! 35 

Mess. Let me endure your wrath, if *t be not so : 
Within this three mile may you see it coming ; 
I say, a moving grove. 

Macb. If thou speak'st false, 

Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive. 
Till famine cling thee : if thy speech be sooth, 40 

I care not if thou dost for me as much. 



70 MACBETH. [Act V. 

I pull in resolution, and begin 

To doubt the equivocation of the fiend 

That lies like truth : * Fear not, till Bimam wood 

Do come to Dunsinane' : and now a wood 45 

Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out ! 

If this which he avouches does appear, 

There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here. 

I gin to be aweary of the sun. 

And wish the estate o' the world were now undone. 50 

Ring the alarum-bell ! Blow, wind ! come, wrack ! 

At least we '11 die with harness on our back. [Exeunt. 

Scene VI. Dunsinane, Before the castle. 

Drum and colours. Enter Malcolm, old Siward, 
Macduff, and their Army, with boughs, 

Mai, Now near enough : your leavy screens throw down, 
And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle, 
Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son. 
Lead our first battle : worthy Macduff and we 
Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, 5 

According to our order. 

Siw, Fare you well. 

Do we but find the tyrant's power to-night. 
Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight. 

Macd, Make all our trumpets speak ; give them all breath, 
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death. [Exeunt. 

Scene VII. Another part of the field. 
Alarums, Enter Macbeth. 

Mcu:b, They have tied me to a stake ; I cannot fly. 
But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What's he 
That was not bom of woman? Such a one 
Am I to fear, or none. 

Enter young Siward. 

Yo, Siw, What is thy name? 

Macb, Thou 'It be afraid to hear it 

Yo, Siw, No ; though thou call'st thyself a hotter name 6 
Than any is in hell. 

Macb. My name 's Macbeth. 

Yo. Siw. The devil himself could not pronounce a tide 
More hateful to mine ear. 



Scene 8.] MACBETH. ^l 

Macb. No, nor more fearful. 

Yo. Siw, Thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword lo 
I 'II prove the lie thou speak'st. 

\fhey fight^ and young Siward is slain, 

Macb. Thou wast bom of woman. 

But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, 
Brandish'd by man that 's of a woman bom. {Exit 

Alarums, Enter Macduff. 

Macd. That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face I 
If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, 15 

My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. 
I cannot strike at wretched kems, whose arms 
Are hired to bear their staves : either thou, Macbeth, 
Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge 
I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be ; 20 

By this great clatter, one of greatest note 
Seems bruited. Let me find him, fortune ! 
And more I beg not. \Exit Alaru?ns, 

Enter MALCOLM and oldSvNPLRJi, 

Siw. This way, my lord ; the castle *s gently rendered : 
The tyrant's people on both sides do fight ; 25 

•The noble thanes do bravely in the war; 
The day almost itself professes yours. 
And little is to do. 

Mai, We have met with foes 

That strike beside us. 

Siw, Enter, sir, the castle. 

{Exeunt alarums. 

Scene VI 1 1. Another part of the field. 

Enter MACBETH. 

Macb. Why should I play the Roman fool, and die 
On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes 
Do better upon them. 

Enter MACDUFF. 

Macd. Tum, hell-hound, turn ! 

McLcb. Of all men else I have avoided thee : 
But get thee back ; my soul is too much charged 5 

With blood of thine already. 

Macd. I have no words : 

My voice is in my sword : thou bloodier villain 



72 MACBETH. [Act V. 

Than terms can give thee out ! [They fight. 

Mack Thou losest labour: 

As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air 
With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed : lo 

Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests ; 
I bear a charmed life, which must not yield 
To one of woman bom. 

Macd. Despair thy charm ; 

And let the angel whom thou still hast served 
Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb 15 

Untimely ripp'd. 

Macb. Accursed be that tongue that tells me so, 
For it hath cow'd my better part of man ! 
And be these juggling fiends no more believed, 
That palter with us in a double sense ; 20 

That keep the word of promise to our ear, 
And break it to our hope. I '11 not fight with thee. 

Macd, Then yield thee, coward. 
And live to be the show and gaze o' the time : 
We '11 have thee, as our rarer monsters are, 25 

Painted upon a pole, and underwrit, 
* Here may you see the tyrant '. 

McLcb, I will not yield, 

To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, 
And to be baited with the rabble's curse. 
Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, 3^ 

And thou opposed, being of no woman bom, 
Yet I will try the last. Before my body 
I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff, 
And damn'd be him that first cries * Hold, enough !' 

{Exeunt^ fighting. Alarums, 

Retreat, Flourish, Enter, with drum and colours, MAL- 
COLM, old SlWARD, Ross, the other Thanes, and Sol- 
diers. 

Mai, I would the friends we miss were safe arrived. 35 

Siw, Some must ^o off : and yet, by these I see. 
So great a day as this is cheaply bought. 

Mai, Macduff is missing, and your noble son. 

Ross, Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt : 
He only lived but till he was a man ; 40 

The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd 
In the unshrinking station where he fought, 
But like a man he died. 



Scene 8.] MACBETH. 73 

Siw. Then he is dead? 

Ross. Ay, and brought off the field : your cause of sorrow 
Must not be measured by his worth, for then 4$ 

It hath no end. 

Siw. Had he his hurts before ? 

Ross. Ay, on the front. 

Siw. Why then, God's soldier be he ! 

Had I as many sons as I have hairs, 
I would not wish them to a fairer death : 
And so, his knell is knoird. 

Mai. He 's worth more sorrow, 50 

And that I '11 spend for him. 

Siw. He 's worth no more : 

They say he parted well, and paid his score : 
And so, God be with him I Here comes newer comfort. 

Re-enter Macduff, with Macbeth'S head. 

Macd. Hail, king ! for so thou art : behold, where stands 
The usurper's cursed head : the time is free : 55 

I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl, 
That speak my salutation in their minds ; 
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine : 
Hail, King of Scotland ! 

All. Hail, King of Scotland ! {Flourish. 

Mai. We shall not spend a large expense of time 60 

Before we reckon with your several loves. 
And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen. 
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland 
In such an honour named. What 's more to do, 
Which would be planted newly with the time, 65 

As calling home our exiled friends abroad 
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny ; 
Producing forth the cruel ministers 
Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, 
Who, as 't is thought, by self and violent hands 70 

Took off her life ; this, and what needful else 
That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, 
We will perform in measure, time and place : 
So, thanks to all at once and to each one, 
Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone. 75 

{Flourish. Exeunt, 



NOTES. 



Act I.— Scene I. 



Time — Morning. 



The First Act has for its theme 
The Temptation. The first short 
scene with the witches gives a hint 
of the evil influences that will per- 
vade the whole play. The second 
scene introduces us to the events 
which lead up to the main story, and 
in the third scene we find ourselves 
in the full current of the play. The 
third and the seventh are the most 
important scenes in this Act. In the 
third the Temptation definitely pre- 
sents itself to Macbeth, and the 
readiness with which he yields to it 
should be noticed. In the seventh 
he is half inclined to draw back, but 
at tlie taunts of his wife he finally 
chooses the evil course, and as the 
Act closes his words show that the 
Temptation is complete. 



8. hurly-burly, a great tumult: the 
word was originally hurly, the 
* burly' being only a modified re- 
petition of the first part Here it 
refers to the rebellion which was 
then throwing Scotland into con- 
fusion. 

4. the battle, which Macbeth wet 
then fighting with the rebels. 

8. Gray mat kin, a gray cat 

9. Paddock, a toad. 

Witches were supposed to haye 
familiar spirits attending them in 
the form of animals, especially cats 
and toads. 

10. Anon, at once. 

11. The witches have chosen evil for 
their good, and what others regard 
as good is to them evil. Notice 
that Macbeth's first words (i. 8. 88) 
are an echo of this line. 



Act I.— Scene 2. 



Ti9n6— Same day as Scene 1. 

This scene has probably not been 
left as Shakesi)eare wrote it Some 
lines are too short; some sentences 
are not complete, and there are 
points in- the story that do not agree 
with later scenes. It looks as if the 
play had been cut down for stage 
purposes. 

8. sergeant, the stage-direction calls 
him a captain. 

6, 7. Tell the king what you know of 
the state of the fight when you 
left it 

8. spent, exhausted. 

9. choke their art, hinder one an- 
other from using their lowers of 
swimming. 

10-12. He has so many evil qualities 
that he is just the man one would 
expect to turn out a xebel. 

10. to that, to that end, i.e. tfi make 
him a rebel 



18. Of, with. 

kernt, light-armed soldiers, 
gallowglastet, heavy-armed sol- 
diers. 

Holinshed mentions kerns and 
gallowglasses in the passage on 
which this scene is based. 
16. all 't too weak, all vms too weak; 
with all their efforts they could not 
overcome Macbeth; '• for vhu is 
very unusual. 

18. The hot blood on his sword sent 
up vapour like steam. 

19. minion, favourite (Fr. mignon, t 
favourite). 

21. Which, often used in Elizabethan 
times for toko. As the text stands 
the antecedent to whidi is ilave. 
i.e. Macdonwald. But it wonld 
make much better sense if the 
whinh referred to Macbeth. Some 
lines have most likely been cat cat 
here. Taking it In this way the 



3.] 



NOTES. 



75 



meanii^ is that Macbeth slew the 
rebel without holding any parley 
with him. 

U. cousin. Duncan and Macbeth 
were bo^ grandsons of Malcolm II. 

[t5. 'gins, b^ins. 

|tS-28. As violent storms sometimes 
come from the east, which we usu- 
ally associate with the gladness of 
sunrise, so trouble sometimes fol- 
lows Upon the very events which 
have brought us success and glad- 
ness. The application of this re- 
mark is that no sooner had Macbeth 
defeated the rebels than he had to 
face the forces of the Norwegian 
king. 

80. skipping, a word suggestive of 
tlie quick movements of the light- 
armed foot-soldiers. 

31. Norweyan, Norw^an. Sweno, 
king of Norway, was helping the 
rebels. 

surveying vantage, seeing his 
opportunity. Vantage, a short- 
ened form of advantage. (The d 
has got into this word by a mis- 
take: It comes from the Lat a&, 
anU^ ftt)m before, through the 
French avant, with the suflOx -age, 
and was spelt avantage in English 
tiU about 1400.) 

82. furbith'd, polished, not yet 
dimmed with fighting. 

84. Yes, said ironically; ' as much as 
a sparrow dismays an eagle*. 

86. sooth, truth. (A. S. soth truth.) 

37. He means 'cannons filled with 
double charges', but puts the effect 
—cra^» (reporta) — for the cause. 
As Macbeth lived and died before 
the Norman Conquest, and cannons 
only came into use some three hun- 
dred vears later, the mention of 
them here is out of place. Such a 
misplacing of things in point of 
time is culed an anaehronism. 

40. memorize, make memorable. 

Qolgotha, ''that is to say, The 



place of a skull" (S. Matthew, xxvii. 
38); so here the word simply means, 
' a place of skulls', ' a battlefield '. 

41. He breaks off, almost fainting, 
and leaves the sentence unfinished. 

43. 8o weil, as well. 

46. thane, an Anglo-Saxon nobleman 
lower than an earl. 

49. flout the sky, flap proudly against 
the sky ; but as the rebellion was 
crushed, Ross must be describing 
the state of things before the battle. 

flout properly means to mock 
(Dutch, Jtuyten, to play on the 
flute, to jeer). 

60. A vivid way of saying that the 
Norwegian banners at first, bv their 
number, alarmed Macbeths sol- 
diers. 

64. Beiiona't bridegroom, Mac- 
beth. Bellona was a Boman god- 
dess of war. 

lapp'd in proof, clad in armour. 

66. Faced him and made comparison 
of their strength in single combat. 

66. Point against point rebeiliout, 
sword opposing sword. 

67. iavish, over full of confidence, 
insolent. 

69. the Norwayt' king, king of the 
Norwegians. 

craves composition, asks for 
terms of peace. 

60. deign, allow. 

61. Saint Coime't inch, the island 
of Saint Columba. now called Inch- 
colm, in the Firth of Forth. Inch, 
meaning island, is common in 
Scotch names. 

62. doilars were first coined about 
five hundred years after Macbeth's 
time, so this is another anachron- 
ism. (See note on line 37 of this 
scene.) 

64. Our bosom interest, those affairs 
which concern us most nearly. 

present, immediate. 



Act I.— Scene 3. 



TiffM— Afternoon of the same day. 

This scene and the seventh are the 
most important parts of the first Act. 
They deal with the temptation and 
yielding of Macbeth. 

1. This la the 'meeting again' re- 



ferred to in the first line of the 
play. The witches are allowed to 
talk for some time before Macbeth 
appears, to give us some further 
insight into their rooted love of 
evil for its own sake. 

2. It was an old belief that witches 



76 



MACBETH. 



[Act I 



had a particalar spite against 
swine. 

6. Arointthee, away with thee. The 
derivation of aroint is uncertain, 
but rynt thee is said to be still 
used in Cheshire in telling a cow 
to get out of the way. 

rump-fed, fed on the daintiest 
bits. 

ronyon, a term of contempt 

7. Aleppo, in the north of Syria. 

Tiger, was a common name for 
ships in Shakespeare's time. 

8. sieve; from the old accounts of 
witches they seem to have been 
fond of sailing about in sieves. 

9. Witches were supposed to be able 
to assume the fonn of any animal 
they pleased, but always under the 
condition that the animal would 
be without a talL 

10. Ratlike, I will gnaw a hole in his 
ship, and sink it 

14. other, sometimes used as a 
plural by Elizabethan writers. 

15. I have under my control the very 
ports towards which they blow. 

17. the shipman's card, the mari- 
ner's compass. The compass was 
known in China before the birth 
of Christ, but was introduced into 
Europe only in the twelfth century. 
Unless the witches can be supposed 
to have a knowledge of Chinese in- 
ventions this must go down as 
another anachronism. (See note 
on 1. 2. S7.) 

20. pent- house lid, eyelid. The 
sloping shape of the eyelid is com- 
pared to the sloping roof of a pent- 
house, or shed put up against the 
wall of another building. (The 
word was formerly pe^itice, but 
was ignorantly changed into pent- 
house. It comes from the O. F. 
appe^itU, an outhouse^ Lat. ad, to, 
pendere, to hang.) 

21. forbid, placed under a ban, ex- 
communicated. Notice the short- 
ened form of the past participle : 
compare i. 4. 3, and see note there. 

22. te'n nights, seven nights, weeks. 
Compare fortnight, for 'fourteen 
nights'. 

28. pealc, grow thfn. 

82. The witches now Join hands and 
dance round in a circle nine times, 
three times for each of them, be- 



cause three was regarded si a 
magic number. 

88. Posters, swift travellers. 

88. The following passage from the 
second edition of Holinabed's 
Chronicles is that on which lines 
38-69 of this scene are based. A 
comparison of it with the text will 
give some idea of the way in which 
Shakespeare used his materials, 
but he does not everywhere follow 
his authority so closely as in this 
scene. Thus there are only a few 
hints in Holinshed corresponding 
to the remainder of the scene. 

"It fortuned as Makbeth and 
Banquho ionmied towards Forw, 
where the king then laie, thej 
went sporting by the waie toglther, 
without other companie. Bane 
onelie themselues,passingthorou{^ 
the woods and fields, when snd- 
denlie in the middest of a laond, 
there met them three women in 
strange and wild apparell, resem- 
bling creatures of elder world, 
whome when they attentinelie be- 
held, woondering much at the 
sight, the first of them spake and 
said; All haile Makbeth. thane of 
Olanmiis (for he had latelie entered 
into that dignitie and office by the 
death of his father Sinell). The 
second of them said; Haile Mak- 
beth thane of Cawder. But the 
third said ; All haile Makbeth that 
heereafter Shalt be king of Scotland. 
Then Banquho; What manner 
of women (saith he) are you, that 
seeme so little fauourablevntome, 
whereas to my fellow heere, besides 
high offices, ye assigne also the 
kingdome, appointing foorth no- 
thing for me at all? Yes(8aiihthe 
first of them) we promise greater 
benefits vnto thee, than vnto him. 
for he shall reigne in deed, hot 
with an vnluckle end: neither 
shall he leaue anie issue behind 
him to succeed in his plaoe, where 
contrarilie thou in deed ^ialt not 
reigne at all, but of thee those 
shall be borne which shall goaera 
the Scotish kingdome by long order 
of continuall descent. Herewith 
the foresaid women vanished in- 
mediatlie out of their sight" 

38. foul and fair: Macbeth simply 
means that It is a day of rapid 
change from storm to sunabine, 
but it should be noticed that theie 



— r 



8a 8.] 



NOTES. 



77 



words echo the last words of the 
witches in Scene 1. This hints at 
a certain agreement already exist- 
ing betweei;! their minds and his : 
he is already pondering evil (see 
below on line 51); they are wholly 
devoted to evil. 

30. Forres, in the N. of Scotland, on 
the Moray Firth, about twenty-flve 
miles from Inverness. Fife, where 
Macbeth had been fighting, is more 
than a hundred miles away. Mac- 
beth must have left Fife soon after 
Koss started, for he reaches Forres 
only a few hours later. A desolate- 
looking heath lies near Forres, and 
close by the town are the ruins of 
an old castle which is said to have 
been used as a residence by Duncan 
and afterwards by Macbeth. 

44. choppy, wrinkled, withered; the 
word sfrictly means marked with 
cracks as if chopped. 

61. Macbeth starts because the idea 
of being king is not new to his own 
mind, but he does not expect to 
hear it put into words by someone 
else. Throughout this interview 
with the witches the contrast be- 
tween the frank, open, dignified 
bearing of Banquo and the startled, 
self-conscious manner of Macbeth 
should be carefully noted. 

53. fantastical, imaginary, created 
by fantasy. 

54. show, appear, seem. 

55. 56. present grace refers to the 
witches' " thane of Glamis", a title 
which Macbeth already possessed. 

great prediction Of noble 
having refers to their promise of 
the tiUe " thane of Cawdor ". 

56. royal hope refers to their 
promise of tiie Idngship. 

57. rapt, carried away in thought. 

withal, therewith; here used as 
an adverb. For a different use see 
i. 5. 28, and note. 

80, 61. Neither beg your favours nor 
fear your hate. This speech, with 
its balanced forms of expression 
here and in lines 55, 56, is full of 
fearless dignity. 

65. Lester, the double comparative 
often occurs in Shakespeare. 

66. happy, in the sense of fortunate. 

71. SInel, the father of Macbeth, al- 
ready dead. 



73. A prosperous gentleman : this 
does not agree with what Boss 
says in i. 2. 50-68, where Cawdor 
is spoken of as having taken a 
prominent part in the rebellion' 
which Macbeth had just crushed. 
It is not unlikely that Shakespeare 
had originally represented Cawdor 
as having given secret help to the 
rebels, unknown to Macbeth, and 
that in tiie alterations which Act i. 
Scene 2 seems to have suffered 
this became obscured. 

74. Does not come within the range 
of what we could ever expect to 
believe. 

76. owe, own, possess. 

81. corporal, having bodily form 
(Lat. corpus^ a body). 

84. the insane root, the root which 
causes insanity ; perhaps the hem- 
lock is meant 

86. Macbeth does not answer Banquo. 
His words show that he was al- 
ready brooding over the hindrances 
to his own enjoyment of the crown. 

89. happily, with pleasure. 
91. Thy personal venture, the way 
you risked your person. 

93. thine refers to praises; hit to 

wonders. 
His wonder at your valour and 

the praises which he wishes to 

bestow upon you struggle in vain to 

find expression. 
96. afeard, afraid. 

Macbeth, fighting in the midst 

of his Norwe^an foes, showed no 

fear of death, while he was dealing 

death on every side. 

99. Reports praising what you had 
done in the great matter of defend- 
ing his kingdom. 

100. Bx)ss talks, especially in these 
last few lines, as if he had been 
with Duncan all the time, instead 
of being himself the latest messen- 
ger from the field of battle. This 
is probably due to the alterations 
which seem to have been made in 
Act i. Scene 2. See note on line 
73 of this scene. 

104. earnest, something given as a 
pledge of something greater to 
follow. 

106. addition, title. 
109. Who, combines relative and 
antecedent in one, md=he who. 



78 



MACBETH. 



[Act I 



112. line, back up, support, as cloth 
is stiffened by lining. 

118. vantage, see note on i. 2. 31. 

111. *116. This uncertainty about 
Cawdor's share in the rebellion 
does not remove the difficulties 
which arise out of the different 
information that Ross and Macbeth 
seem to have about him; but it 
strengthens the suggestion made 
in the note on line 78 of this scene. 

117. The greatest, the kingship 
promised him by the witches. 

120. That, Banquo is thinking of the 
prophecy that Macbeth should be 
king, though it has not been actu- 
ally mentioned. 

trusted home, trusted com- 
pletely, to the uttermost. 

121. enkindle you, tempt you to try 
to win. 

Notice the marked difference In 
the effect which this partial con- 
firmation of the prophecy has upon 
the two men: Banquo, though 
startled at first, is quite unmoved 
by evil purposes : Macbeth is full 
of 'horrible imaginings': the evil 
seed had fallen upon well-prepared 
ground. 

125. Win us with honest trifles, by 
proving true in some small detail 
they induce us to follow them to 
our ruin. 

betray 's, betray us. 

If Macbeth was not too busy 
with his plots to heed these words, 
they would come back to him with 
force when the later promises that 
he received Uirough the witches 
led him to his destruction, though 
they were literally true. See v. 8. 
19-22. 

127. Banquo turns to Boss and Angus. 

128, 129. A comparison borrowed from 
the stage. 

12a prologue, a piece spoken as an 
introdncuon to a play. Shake- 
speare's play of Henry V. has a 
prologue to each act. 

the swelling act, the growing 
glory of his life, from thane to 
king. 

129. the Imperial theme, the king- 
ship, from which he cannot divert 
his thoughts. 



184. that suggestion, to make him- 
self king by murdering Duncan. 
Notice ti^at he already ^elds to it 

186. unfix my hair, make it stand 
on end. 

186. seated, firmly placed. 

187. use, custom. 

187,188. Dangers which actually con- 
front us cause less fear than the 
evil things that we imagine. This 
was very true of Macbeth : he was 
bold enough in battle, but a cow- 
ard when thinking over his deeds 
either before or after doing them. 

189. fantastical, imaginary. The 
word is uded by Banquo in line M 
of this scene. 

140-142. This mere idea of murder 
shakes my whole being so that my 
powers of thought and action are 
overcome, and nothing seems real 
but these yet unacted suggestions. 

140.' my single state of man; man 
is compared to a commonwealth 
whose singleness (unity, harmony) 
Is disturbed by the intrusion of 
evU. 

141. surmise, the ' horrible imagin- 
ings' of line 188. 

142. rapt. See line 57 of this scene. 

144. come, the past participle, not 
the present indicative. 

145, 146. New clothes do not fit ni 
well till we have worn them a little. 
So Macbeth's new dignity does not 
yet sit easily on him. 

147. The meaning is the same as in 
the proverb, ' It 's a long lane that 
has no turning '. 

The singular rang may be ac- 
counted for by the fact that ' time 
and the hour ' form a single idea. 

148. stay upon, await 

149. 160. Macbeth pretends that his 
absent-mindedness was due to his 
trying to remember something be 
had forgotten. 

158-166. These last three Unes are 
spoken to Banquo only. 

154. The interim having weigh'd 
it, having thought it over in the 
meantime. 

155. free is transferred from ipMl 
to hearU : ' speak our hearts freely'* 



8&i.] 



KOTBS. 



79 



Act I. — Scene 4. 



Time—yLoming of the next day. 

2. Those in commission, the officers 
or commissioners appointed to see 
to the execution. 

8. spolce, for spoken. In Elizabethan 
authors there was a general tend- 
ency to drop the termination en, 
so that shortened forms of the past 
participle are frequent. If the 
shortened form was liable to be 
confused with the inflnitive the 
past tense was often used, as o'er- 
took for o'ertaken (iv. L 142). See 
also the Appendix. 

9. had been studied, had made it 
his study. 

10. the dearest thing he owed, the 
most precious Uiing he possessed. 

12. To find, by which we can find. 

the mind's construction, may 
mean either the structure of the 
mind, i.e. the largely permanent 
formation of the mind which we 
call character; or the temporary 
purposes which are at any given 
moment being constructed in the 
mind. 

13. Notice how Duncan's words about 
Cawdor apply with equal force to 
Macbeth, who was even a worse 
traitor than Cawdor. The entrance 
of Macbeth just as these words are 
spoken is one of the most dramatic 
touches in the play. 

15. The tin of my ingratitude, a 
rather exaggerated way of speaking 
of the fact of his not yet having 
expressed his gratitude. 

16. to far before, your services are 
so far beyond what my gratitude 
can repay. 

19, 20. That I might have been able 
to reward you above your deserts 
rather than so far below them. 



22. Duncan's gratitude is full and 
overflowing; Macbeth's answer is 
formal and stiff. 

23. pays itseif, is its own reward. 

27. Safe toward, unwaveringly to- 
ward. 

SO, 31. nor must be known No less, 
a double negative in Shakespeare 
is not equal to an affirmative (as 
in the Latin 7u>nnulU), but to a 
strengthened negative. We should 
say "aiid must be known, &o.". 
Compare note on iii. 6. 8. 

37. establish our estate, settle the 
succession to the throne. In these 
early times the eldest son of a king 
did not always succeed to the 
throne, and Macbeth, being of 
royal blood, might have hoped to 
be chosen king on Duncan's death. 
This action of Duncan's, however, 
destroyed such a hope, and helped 
to decide Macbeth in his treacher- 
ous purpose. 

39. Prince of Cumberland, a title 
corresponding to our English title, 
"Prince of Wales". Cumberland 
-was at this time held by the Scot- 
tish kings as a fief of the English 
crown. 

42. to Inverness, about twenty-five 
miles from rorres. Macbeth's 
castle was at Inverness. 

44. To be resting, instead of working 
for you, is toilsome. 

45. harbinger, forerunner: properly, 
one who provides shelter for a man 
of rank. (Connected with harbour.) 

62. Let not the eye see what the hand 
does. 

54. Banquo has been privately prais- 
ing Macbeth's bravery in battle to 
Duncan. 



Act I. — Scene 6. 

Time — The same day. 

2. by the perfectest report, by the 
most convincing evidence, viz.. the 
fact that part of what they foretold 
had already come true. 

6. Whiles, while. Shakespeare uses 
both words in the same sense. 

rapt, see note on i. 3. 57. 



6. missives here means 'messen- 
gers ' : usually (though not in Shake- 
speare) it means * letters '. 

9. deliver thee, report to thoe. 

18. Notice that in Lady Macbeth's 
speech, full as it is of fixed deter- 
mination to do evil, there is no 
word that suggests that she desires 



80 



MAGBBTE. 



[Aetl. 



the crown for herself; she is think- 
ing only of her hasband, and the 
very account she gives of his char- 
acter, far surpassing what he de- 
serves, shows how she is devoted 
to him. 

18. The iiinesftthould, the evil which 
should. 

20-23. It is difficult to make good 
sense out of these lines; the text 
is probably corrupt. The meaning 
may perhaps be expressed thus: 
You need some one to say to you, 
" Thus must thou do (kill Duncan) 
if you wish to have the crown"; 
and this killing of Duncan is a thing 
which you are afraid to do rather 
than a thing which you wish not 
to be done. 

23. Hie thee, hasten. See ill. 1. 36. 

25. chastise. The accent is on the 
first syllable. 

26. the golden round, the crown. 

27. metaphysical, supernatural. 

doth, another singular verb with 
two subjects. Compare i. 3. 147. 

28. withal, a form of the preposition 
with used when it comes after the 
word it governs : tlie prose order 
would be, " With which fate . . . 
doth seem". -Compare i. 3. 67. 

tidings, properly plural, but 
sometimes used, like news, as a 
singular. 

29. The servant's message follows so 
strangely upon Lady Macbeth's 
thoughts that she is betrayed into 
a violent expression of surprise, 
but to avert the suspicions which 
her exclamation might arouse, she 
tries to account for it in the next 
two lines. 

83. had the speed of him, travelled 
more speedily than he (Macbeth) 
did. 

89. mortal, deadly, murderous. So 
Milton at the beginning of Para- 



diM Lost speaks of the 'mortal 
taste' of the tree forbidden to Adam 
and Eve, meaning Uie tasting that 
brought death with it 

42. remorse does not here mean re- 
gret for the deed when done, bat 
relenting from the idea of it before- 
hand. 

43. compunctious visltings of na- 
ture, natural feelings of pi^. 

44. fell, cruel. 

44, 45. keep peace between The 
effect and it, prevent the murder 
by putting a barrier between my 
purpose and the carrying oat of it 

47. sightless, invisible. 

48. wait on nature's mischief, are 
ready to help on the evil prompt- 
ings of our nature. 

49. pall thee, wrap thyself. 

dunnest, darkest. 

60. This looks as if Lady Macbeth 
was thinking of murdering Dnncan 
with her own hand. Compare linei 
65, 66 of this scene, and i. 7. 69. 

58. by the all-hail hereafter, by the 
title of king promised to yoiL 

66. the instant, the present 

60-64. Lady Macbeth has much mors 
power than her hasband of hiding 
her feelings behind a pleasant face. 
She has to urge him to the same 
thing when he is plotting the 
murder of Banquo. (See ill 2. 
26-28). 

61, 62. To deceive those who are about 
you, look as bright and cheerful at 
a man should who is entertaining 
a royal guest 

65. Must be provided for, an in- 
nocent phrase containing a guilty 
meaning. 

70. If you change countenance people 
will see that you are afraid of some- 
tiling. 



Act I. — Scene 6. 



Time— Afternoon of the same day as 
Scenes 4 and 6. 

The opening words of this scene 
are full of the sweet, peaceful air 
of the country, and, by suggesting 
the general feeling of repose and 
trustfulness which seemed to sur- 
round the castle, add to the horror 



of the treachery that was being 
planned. 

3. gentle: the adjective properly 
belongs to the noun air^ but i> 
transfeiTed to another word as i> 
frequent in Shakespeare. 

4. martlet, martin. 

approve, prove. 



1-] 



NOTES. 



81 



5. mansionry, hoiiBe building. 

6. Jutty, projecting point: the same 
word as jetty. (Old Pr. jettie, a 
throw, from jetter^ to throw.) 

frieze, a term in architecture 
meaning a part of the building over 
the columns, often ornamented 
with projecting work. 

7. coign of vantage, corner offering 
an opportunity for building. 

8. pendent, hanging. 

procreant cradle, nest where 
she rears her young. 

10. Macbeth cannot trust himself to 
meet Duncan yet, so his wife re- 
ceives the king. 

11. sometime, sometimes. Both 
words are used by Shakespeare with 
the same meaning. 

11-14. Duncan means that while the 
very affection of his subjects some- 
times troubles him, yet he always 
welcomes it, because it is affection. 
Now he is showing his affection for 
his subjects by visiting them ; but 
In so doing he gives them trouble. 






Still he hopes that they too will 
regard this trouble as a proof of 
his affection, and will therefore 
ask God to reward him for giving 
them this trouble. 

13. 'lid, a corruption of 'yield', in 
the sense of 'reward'. (A. S. 
gieldan^ to pay), 

16. single, contrasted with the 
'double' of the previous line. 

16, 17. to contend Against, match 
itself with. 

20. hermits, in the sense that they 
would always feel bound to pray 
for him. 

21. coursed, chased. 

22. purveyor, provider: to have out- 
ridden him so as to prepare for his 
arrival. 

23. holp, an old form of the parti- 
ciple 'helped*. (The A. S. verb 
kelpan was strong: the modem 
verb is weak.) 

26. compt, account. 
81. Duncan takes Lady Macbeth's 
hand and leads her into the castle. 



Act I.— Scene 7. 



Time — ^Evenlug of the same day. 

Sewer, an upper servant who 
directed the laying of a dinner. It 
formerly meant one who tasted the 
food to prove that there was no 
poison in it (ME. sewen, to set 
meat: it has no connection with 
sewer, a drain, which is a Erench 
word.) 

1-12. This is a passage of some diffi- 
culty. The general meaning is 
that Macbeth is not troubled by 
thoughts of the next world, but is 
afraid because evil deeds often 
bring their own reward in this 
world. 

In more detail : If all the difficulties 
were overcome when Duncan is 
murdered, then the sooner he is 
murdered the better (lines 1, 2). 
If the murder could bring all the 
consequences along with it at once, 
and with Duncan's death win 
success (2-4), so that one blow of 
the dagger should rid him of any 
further trouble in this world, then 
Macbeth would risk the judgment 
of the next world (4-7). But what 
troubled him was tliat judgment 
often falls upon evildoers here; 

( M 113 ) 



and that evil d'eeds have an ugly 
habit of recoiling upon the heads 
of those who do them in this world, 
without waiting for the next (7-12). 

3. trammel up, catch up as in a net 
(Fr. tramail, a net for partridges : 
Lat tri, threefold, macula, a net) 

4 With h is su rcease, with the death 
of Duncan, (surcease properly 
means 'delay', 'stoppage'; it has 
no connection withcease, but comes 
from the Old Fr. mrsis, pp. of 
euraeoir, todelay ; Lat supersedere. ) 

6. But here, only here, in this world. 

this bank and shoal of time: 
eternity is compared to a vast 
ocean, and time to a sandbank 
rising out of it 

7. Jump, jump over, ignore. 

8. still, always. 

here, in this life, 
that, so that. 
11. Commends, offers, commits, 
chalice, cup. 

17. borne his faculties, fulfilled the 
duties of his office. 

meek, the adj. used for the ad- 
verb, meekly. 

F 



82 



MACBETH. 



[Act L 8a 7. 



18. clear, free from suspicion of 
wrongdoing. 

20. his taking-off : MacbeUi avoids 
the ugly word 'murder', just as his 
wife does in i. 6. 66, 66. 

21-25. Pity is compared to a ' naked 
new-born babe' because of its 
gentle tenderness; but this com- 
parison is at once dropped, and not 
resumed. 'Striding the blast', of 
course, refers to *pity', not to 
* babe '. The sense then is: * When 
it is known that Duncan has been 
murdered, pity, which in its ten- 
derness is like a new-born babe, 
and like heaven's cherubin in its 
power of swift movement, will 
sweep through tiie land as if car- 
ried upon a mighty wind, bringing 
tears to every eye'. 

2S. sightless, invisible : used in the 
same sense in i. 6. 47. 

26-28. There are two distinct meta- 
phors here; the first of a rider 
urging on an unwilling horse with 
the spur; the second of a man trying 
to mount a horse in haste and so 
leaping over it instead of on to it. 
' I have nothing with which to urge 
myself on to this deed as a horse is 
urged on by the spur ; I have only 
ambition, which often overreaches 
itself, like a man who, in trying to 
mount a horse, leaps over it In- 
stead.' 

29. He, Duncan. 

81-35. Macbeth is unwilling to put 
his plot into execution, not because 
he feels ashamed of its ingratitude 
and treachery, but because people 
might say unpleasant things about 
him. 

84. would, we should say 'should*. 
He compares the 'golden opinions' 
to a new dress which he is anxious 
to wear. This suggests the first 
words of Lady Macbeth's reply. 

85,36. the hope. ..Wherein you 
dress'd yourself, the hope which 
you put on like a garment, in which 
you were entirely wrapped up. But 
there is another mixture of meta- 
phors here, for a garment cannot 
be said to get drunk. His hope is 
first compared to a drunken man, 
then to a garment, and then the 
former comparison is resumed. 

87. green and pale, referring to the 
miserable appearance of a man 
waking out of a drunken sleep. 



88. what it did so freely, the thou^hta 
of coming glory and power in which 
Macbeth had indulged. 

80. Such, no more fixed and oonstant 
than tlie hopes which were so strong 
but have now become so 'green and 
pale'. 
afeard, afraid, as in I 3. 96. 

42. the ornannent of life, the crown. 
The meaning is, ' Are you longing 
to be king, and yet too much of a 
coward to strike tiie blow which 
will make you king?' 

45. the adage, the proverb to which 
Lady Macbeth refers is found in 
Heywood's Proverbs, published in 
1562: "The cat would eate fyshe, 
and would not wet her feete ". 

Prithee, I pray thee. 

47. beast, as contrasted with ' man ' 
in the previous line. 

52. Did then adhere, offered them- 
selves in connection with your pur- 
pose. 

would make, wished to make. 

53. that their fitness, that very fit- 
ness of theirs. 

59. Macbeth is beginning to give 
way : this is quite a different tone 
from that of his last speech. 

60. But, only. 

The idea underlying Lady Mac- 
beth's expression is that of the 
screwing up of the strings of a 
musical instrument, such as a 
violin, to the required pitch 

64. wassail, properly a salutation, 
" Be of health ", used in drinking a 
person's health. (AS. woes haeL) 
Hence it came to mean drinking, 
revelry, as here. 

convince, overcome, a literal 
rendering of the Lat. eonvineere. 
65-67. It was an old idea that the 
brain was divided into three cham- 
bers, in one of which the memory 
was placed. As this was supposed 
to be at the back, it might be com- 
pared to a guard-room, protecting 
the rest of the brain as long as it 
was safe. Drink, however, might 
overcome memory, and convert it 
into a mere fume, which would fill 
the other chambers as vapours fill 
a distilling vessel. 

66. receipt, receptacle. 

67. A limbeck, a corruption of aUm- 
bie, a vessel for distilling (AraMo 
a{, the; anfrift, a still). 



▲ctlLBcl.] 



NOTES. 



83 



69. you and I, another suggestion 
that Lady Macbetli thought of mur- 
dering Duncan with her own hand. 
Compare i. 6. 50, and ii. 2. 14. 

70. put upon, what suspicions can 
we not tnrow upon. 

71. spongy, filled with drink. 

72. quell, killing, murder. (A.S. 
ev}eUan, to kill.) 

73. mettle is the same word as metal, 
and in Shakespeare's time no dLs- 
tinction was made between the 



words. Since then metal has been 
confined to the literal sense, and 
mettle to tlie transferred sense of 
'courage', 'spirit*. 

74-77. Macbeth's scruples are all re- 
moTed now that he thinks there ia 
np fear of being found out. 

77. other, otherwise. 

78. As, seeing that. 

79, 80. bend up Each corporal 
agent, summon all the powers of 
my body: the underlying idea is 
that of stringing a bow. 



Act II. — Scene I. 



Time — Immediately following the 
last scene : a little after midnight 

The theme of the Second Act is the 
murder of Duncan. The strained ex- 
citement reaches its highest pitch in 
the second scene, where Macbeth is, 
for the moment, filled with dread at 
the deed he has done. The drunken 
tramoor of the porter, all unconscious 
of what has been done, makes us feel 
the horror of the previous scene by 
force of contrast But at the close 
evil is triumphant; Macbeth has 
gained the crown. 

The first three scenes of this Act 
might, with advantage, be made into 
one : at any rate it must be clearly 
anderstood that there is no break in 
time, or change of place between 
them. 

2. clock : the earliest clocks probably 
had no dials, but indicated time 
by striking only. It is hardly likely 
that Macbeth had one in his castle, 
but they began to be introduced 
into monasteries soon after this 
time. 

4. husbandry, economy. 

5. Take thee that too. Banquo hands 
to Fleance his dagger, sword-belt, 
or some other article. It must 
always be remembered that Shake- 
speare Intended his plays for the 
stage, not for reading, and some 
points, therefore, need to be accom- 
paniea by action to make their 
« meaning clear. 

7-8. Evil influences seem to be per- 
vading the air, but Banquo, unlike 
Macbeth, resists them. 

14. largess, a liberal gift (Fr. 
largesse, bounty: Lat largut, large, 
liberal.) 



14 offices, the servants' quarters. 

15. withal, with : see note on i. 5. 28. 

16, 17. and shut up In measureless, 
content : the text is probably cor- 
rupt We may suppose it to have 
meant that Duncan concluded his 
message with measureless con- 
tent or that he shut himself up 
in his room In that frame of mind. 

17-19. As we were not prepared for 
Duncan's visit our wishes to pro- 
vide a worthy reception for nira 
could not be fully carried out, but 
had to submit to the necessity of 
offering him imperfect hospitality. 

19. Which, the antecedent is 'will'. 

All's well, you have provided a 
worthy reception. 

22. entreat an hour to serve, pre- 
vail upon an hour to put itself at 
our disposal ; a roundabout way of 
saying ' find a little spare time '. 

25. If you consent to Join in my plans 
when the time comes. 

28. franchised, free from anything 
disloyal to the king. 

29. I shall be counsell'd, I will 
follow your suggestion, to act with 
you. 

SI, 32. The bell was to be a signal 
to Macbeth that the guards of 
Duncan's chamber were overcome 
with the drugged wine; but he 
wished the servant to suppose that 
it was a sign that his nightdraught 
was ready. 

31. my drink: it was customary at 
the time for the rich to drink a cup 
of spiced wine before going to bed. 
In an early chapter of Scott's 
Ivanhoe Bowena has this draught 
offered to her. 



84 



HACBBIH. 



[Aefcn. 



96. sensible, capable of being per- 
ceived by the aense (of f eelingX 

40. palpable, able to be felt, i.e. it 
looked as if it could be felt just as 
roach as the real dagger he drew. 

44, 45. Either my eyes are deceived 
while the other senses are not, or 
else they are able to perceive some- 
thing which theothersare incapable 
of grasping. 

46. dudgeon, handle. 

gouts, drops. (Fr. goutte; Lat 
gutta, both meaning a drop.) 

47. Notice how, by an effort of wfll, 
Macbeth banishes the illusion : he 
has less command of himself when 
he thinks that he sees the ghost of 
Banquo (iii. 4. 40-107). 

60. abuse, deceive: the noun is used 
In a similar sense in iii 4. 142. 

61. 52. Witches are now making their 
offerings with due ceremony to He- 
cate. 

62. Hecate, in classical mythology a 
goddess of the lower world ; pop- 
ularly regarded as queen of the 
witches. 

Hecate appears as a speakingchar- 
acter in iii. 5. and iv. 1. 36-40, and 
is mentioned in the stage-direction 
after iv. 1. 129. It is most likely 
that these passages have been put 
into Shakespeare's play by another 
hand, probably by Middleton. The 
mention of Hecate in this line may 
have sufi^ested the dragging of her 
in in the other scenes. 

62. wither'd murder, personifying 
murder as a lean and shrunken 
villain. 

68. To whom the wolf acts as a sen- 



ttaA and gives the alama. iAlar- 
timed is the same word as oZarmed.) 

64. whose howl 's his watch, who 

marks the watches of the nif^t by 
howls. 



56. my steps, which way they ^ursiik, 

instead of 'which way my steps 
walk'. Shakespeare often makes 
a noun or pronoun the direct ob- 
ject of the verb when we sfaonld 
put a subordinate sentence. He 
then uses the subordinate sentence 
merely to explain the objects So 
in the Merchant of Venice (iv. 
1. 167} we find, "You hear the 
leam'd Bellario, what he writes *'. 
for 'Yon hear what the leam'd 
Bellario writes'. Such an over- 
abundance of words is called a 
pleonasm. 

hi. the very stones prate, by mak- 
ing a noise as I walk over them. It 
has been suggested that there is 
a reference to Luke, xix. 40, but it 
is rather unlikely. Prate^=talk: 
prattle is derived from it. 

68. The complete sOenoe suits the 
horror of the night; any kind of 
noise would lessen it 

69. Whiles : see note on i. 5. 6. 

60. When a man talks OTermnch 
about his intentions he is not so 
likely to carry them into action : a 
fact of which Macbeth might well 
have reminded himself on other 
occasions. 



elves, has a plural subject : 
note on ii. S. 76. 



see 



61-63. Lady Macbeth now rings the 
bell as before arranged (see note 
on lines 81, 32 of this scene). Mac- 
beth compares it to the 'passing 
bell ' rung when a person is dying. 



Act ll.^Scene 2. 



Time —Immediately foUowingupon 
Scene i. : early morning. 

1. Lady Macbeth has been drinking 
wine to stimulate her for the night's 
work. 

2. quench'd, stupefied, for the wine 
she had given to the guards was 
drugged. 

8. the fatal bellman: many passages 
in old writers show that the owl 
has from very early times been re- 
garded as a bird of evil omen. 
Here he Lb likened to a man ring- 



ing the bell on the night before 
a condemned person was pnt to 
death. 

6. grooms, servants. 

6. mock their charge, show by their 
snoring their uselessness as watch- 
ers. 

possets, a hot draught, generally 
taken at night, made of milk, ale, 
sugar, biscuits, eggs, Ac. 

7. That, so that 

9. Macbeth is on his way downstairs 
after murdering Duncan. He thinks 



8a 2. J 



l^OTBS. 



85 



he hears someone speak in the 
courtyard, and in his excited state 
mahes on to a balcony and shouts 
out. But he sees only his wife, so 
tarns back and comes on downstaini 
to her. 

11, 12. The attempt and not the 
deed Confounds us: if we attempt 
to murder Duncan and do not suc- 
ceed we shall be ruined. 

13, 14. Although Lady Macbeth had 
called up all her power of will to 
sustain her in her cruel purpose 
she has not succeeded in crushing 
down all womanly feeling, as these 
words prove. 

23. one did laugh . . . one cried, 
Malcolm and Donalbain, Duncan's 
sons, sleeping in a room next to 
that in which their father lay. 

28. As, as if. 

hangman's, executioner's. In 
the Merchant of Venice (iv. 1. 126) 
' the hangman's axe' is spoken of. 

29. Listening: as.the preposition ' to' 
is omitted^istening is a transitive 
▼erb. 

83. thought, we should say 'thought 
of. 

84. so, if we do think of tiiem so. 

87. sleave: not the same word as 
HeevCf the arm of a coat. <&c. : it 
means loose silk, or floss silk, as it 
is often called : so that the ravelled 
sleave is 'tangled, loose silk'. 

80. great nature's second course: 

our active, waking hours are spoken 
of as one course^ or division of life; 
the time of sleep is the second di- 
viidon : course is used in the sense 
of race, journey. The idea of a 
second course at a meal might be 
suggested by the words, 'Chief 
nourisher in life's feast'; but it 
should be noted that up to this 
point all the metaphors are abso- 
lutely distinct from one another; 
and I cannot find any authority for 
the statement that the second 
course was the 'chief nourisher' 
in Elizabethan banquets. 

42. This repetition of his titles recalls 
the meeting with the witches on 
the heath (f 3. 48). 

44. For a moment Lady Macbeth is 



carried away by the frenzied ex- 
citement of her husband ; but in a 
moment she regains command of 
herself. 

45. unt>end your noble strength, 
perhaps this is meant to be con- 
trasted with Macbeth's words in 
i. 7. 79, 80. 

46. brainsicicly, madly. 

47. this filthy witness, this blood 
which gives evidence of what you 
have done: the word 'witness' is 
used to mean (1) one who sees any- 
thing take place, (2) one who having 
seen it gives an account of it before 
some authority. It is used in the 
latter sense here, but applied to a 
thing instead of to a person. 

63-55. People asleep or dead are as 
motionless and as harmless as 
people in pictures; and it is only 
children that are afraid of horrible 
pictures. 

66. 57. gild, guilt: the fact that Ladjr 
Macbeth could make a pun in such 
circumstances shows how complete- 
ly she had for the time steeled her- 
self to all feeling. 

66. withal, see note on L 6. 31. 

67. It was Macduff and Lennox who 
were knocking at the castle gate : 
see the next scene. 

62 multitudinous may refer to the 
numberless waves of the sea. 

incarnadine, make red. 

68. Turning the green colour of the 
waves into a universal red. 

66. retire we, let us retire. 

68, 69. The constancy (braver}') which 
used to attend you has forsaben 
you. 

70. nightgown, what we should call 
a dressing-gown. 

lest occasion call us, lest the 
discovery of the murder or some 
other reason should make it neces- 
sary for us to come out of our room, 
in which case we must not appear 
dressed as in the daytime. 

72. 8o poorly, in such an unworthy, 
cowardly way. 

73. It would be better for me to lose 
all consciousness than to have to 
realize fully what I have done. 



86 



MACBETH. 



[Actn. 



Act II. — Scene 3. 



Time.— Immediately following the 
last scene: morning. 

Some writers liave supposed that 
the early part of this scene was not 
written by Shakespeare, but they 
have missed the real purpose of it. It 
is meant to remind us titiat the out- 
side world, knowing nothing of the 
murder, was going on just as it did 
before. The porter of the castle has 
had his full share in the general f east- 
ing,'and in his rough drunken humour 
pretends that he is porter at the gate 
of helL After the high-strained ex- 
citement of the last scene we are 
brought back with a rough shake to 
the everyday world, and &e contrast 
helps us to realize the horror of Mac- 
beth's crime. 

2. oid, a slang word here, with no 
very definite meaning : ' plenty of 
turning' is something like what is 
meant. Compare the expression 
* a high old time '. 

4, 5. a farmer. . plenty. When an 
unusually plentiful harvest is ex- 

Sected, the price of com goes 
own, and so the farmers suffer. 
This actually happened in 1606, 
and the line may be meant to al- 
lude to this fact. If so, it helps 
to fix the date of the play. (See 
Introduction, section 1.) 
6. come in time. You've come in 
time. 

napkins, handkerchiefs. 

enow, still used in some iiarts 
of the eastern counties for enough 
before a word beginning with a 
consonant 

8. an equlvocator, one who pur- 
posely makes misleading state- 
ments. In 1606 a Jesuit, who was 
being tried for taking part in the 
Gunpowder Plot, publicly declared 
that he considered equivocation a 
lawful thing. Shakespeare is per- 
haps referring to this, and if so we 
have another indication of the date 
of the play. The words "who 
committed treason enough " make 
it still more likely that he was 
thinking of this tdal. 

10. equivocate to heaven, get to 
heaven by equivocation. 

IS. stealing out of a French hose. 
Some French hose (i,e. knicker- 
bockers) were rather large and 



l>afilgy> ADd it was a common chanere 
a^nst tailors that they used to 
cut pieces out of them before 
selling them. 

14. roast your goose : the long iron 
which tailors use is called a goose, 

Eerhaps because its handle looked 
ke the neck of a goose. 

22. The reveliy was kept up till 
three o'clock in the morning. In 
Bomeo and Juliet (iv. 4. 3.) are the 
lines: 

''The second cock hath crowed. 
The cui'few bell hath rung, 't is 
three o'clock". 

26. Qood morrow : mom and ntor- 
row both come from the Middle 
English morwen. Compare the 
Scotch phrase, the morn'g mom= 
to-morrow morning. 

27. timely, early, in good time. 

28. slipp'd, let slip, let the hour go 
by. 

29. this, entertaining the king at 
such short notice. 

31. physics pain: when we take 
pleasure in any task it is no longer 
troublesome ; the trouble is cured 
by the pleasure. 

33. limited, appointed. Shakespeare 
uses the word in this sense in 
several passages. 

38. Voices were heard foretelling 
terrible events. 

prophesying is here the gerund 
or vernal noun. 

39. combustion, the blazing up of 
riot, social disturbances. 

40. the obscure bird, the owl. See 
li. 2. 8, and 16. It is called obscure 
because it is a bird of the night. 
Notice the accent, which is on the 
first syllable. 

42. Was feverous : an ague fever 
caused fits of shaking and shiver- 
ing : the shaking of the ground in 
an earthquake might be compared 
to this. 

43. parallel. The idea of this word 
is rei)eated in ' fellow '. 

45, 46. Macduff in his excitement 
uses too many negatives: in or- 
dinaiy language we should say, 
' Neither tongue nor heart can con- 
ceive or name thee '. 

47. Confusion, destruction. 



3.] 



NOTES. 



87 



47. made hit masterpiece, done 
the most notable deed he will ever 
succeed in doing. 

48S0. Duncan is compared to a 
temple which has been broken in- 
to and ransacked of its treasures. 
There is a reference to 2 Cor. 
▼1. 16, " For ye are the temple of 
tlie living God". At the same 
time the words ' murder ' and ' life ' 
show that the simple statement of 
fact is not wholly merged in the 
metaphor, and this leads to a slight 
confusion. 'The Lord's anointed' 
is a phrase used of King Saul in 
1 Sam. xxiv. 10. 

48,49. broke.. stole. See note on 
i. 4. 8. 

48. ope, a similarly shortened form 
of the adjective open. 

52, 63. destroy your sight With a new 
Oorgon. The Gorgons were three 
sistere so dreadful in appearance 
that anyone who looked on them 
was turned to stone. Perseus suc- 
ceeded in slaying one of them, and, 
having cut off her head, turned his 
enemies into stone by making them 
look at it Shakespeare had pro- 
bably read the account of the Gor- 
gon's head in Ovid's Metamorphoies, 
w. 18&-210. 

55. alarum-bell, alarm-belL (Com- 
pare ii. 1. 68. 

69. The great doom's image, a 
sight as terrible as the Last Judg- 
ment. 

60. sprites^ spirits. (Fr. esprit: 
Lat spintus.) 

03. The bell now ringing violently is 
compared by Lady Macbeth to the 
trumpet which in war sounds for 
a conference (parley). 

74. mortality, our mortal life. 

76. Notice the singulai* verb ^th 
two subjects ; andf in line 77 with 
one plural subject Elizabethan 
writers did not observe the rules of 
syntax so strictly as we do to day. 
Compare i. 3. 147 and i. 6. 27. 

76, 77. Life Is henceforth like a cellar 
from which the wine has been 
drawn and only the dregs left 

70. lees, the dregs of wine. 

88. badged, marked as wiUi a badge. 

02, 93. My affection for Duncan made 
me act more harshly than reason 
would have allowed. 

98. Outrun: this form is now usu- 



ally kept for the past participle: 
we should say * outran'. 

93. the pauser, reason: reason 
which stops men from acting 
hastily. 

94. laced, streaked. 

98. breech'd, covered as with 
breeches. 

100. It must be remembered that 
Lady Macbeth had, a little while 
before, looked at Duncan's bleeding 
form. (See ii. 2. 60-67, 64, and v. 1. 
43, 44.) To hear her husband now 
describing the awful sight in min- 
utest detail is more than even her 
iron will can bear, and she faints. 

102. argument, subject for dis- 
cussion. 

103, 104. our fate, Hid in an auger- 
hole: he means that the treachery 
from which his father has suffered 
may yet attack them, and may come 
from a quarter as likely to be over- 
looked as an auger-hole. 

106, 107. It is too soon for our sorrow 
to make movement towards re- 
venge. 

107. Macbeth takes no notice of his 
wife; he Is too much absorbed in 
his own position to care for her 
fainting ; compare the way in which 
he receives the news of her death 
(v. 6. 17, eg.). 

108. naked frailties, half -clothed 
bodies, for they had rushed out in 
haste at the ringing of the bell. 

113. pretence, purpose, intention. 
In ii. 4. 24 pretend is used for in- 
tend, purpose. 

116. manly readiness, our clothing : 
' ready' is sometimes used to mean 
' dressed ' by Shakespeare. 

117. Malcolm feels that any or all of 
these men may be guilty of the 
murder of his faUier. 

119. easy, for the adverb easily. 

122. There's daggers: see note on 
line 76 of Uiis scene. 

near, used in the sense of nearer. 
The form near is properly the com- 
parative of nigh, so that nearer is 
a double comparative. 

He who is nearest to us in rela- 
tionship is the most likely to seek 
our blood. Macbeth was Duncan's 
cousin. Donalbain expresses more 
definite suspicions than Malcolm. 

128, 124. This murderous attack upon 



88 



MACBETH. 



[ActHL 



our father is like an arrow that has 
not yet spent its force ; it may yet 
strike us. 



127, 128. A man may be excused for 
stealing (himself) away if that is his 
only hope of safety. 



Act II.— Scene 4. 



Time— L&ter in the same morning. 

4. Has made my previous experiences 
seem trifling. 

6. The world is compared to the stage 
of a theatre : compare i 3. 128. 

7. the travelling lamp, the sun. 

8. Has night conquered day (as evil 
has just conquered goodness), or is 
the day ashamed to show itself? 

12. towe ring and place, though used 
in a natural sense here, are techni- 
cal terms in falconry, and there is 
a reference to their technical mean- 
ing. 

towering, the rising of a hawk 
in the air until it is ready to swoop 
down on its prey. 

place, the position it occupies 
just before swooping down. 

13. hawk'd at, pounced upon, as an 
owl pounces upon a mouse. 

16. minions, favourites: in L 2. 19 
Macbeth is called '* Valour's 
minion ". 

17. as, as if. 

24 pretend, intend, purpose: what 
did they expect to gain oy it? See 
note on iL 3. 113. 



24. suborn'd, bribed, secret!/ 
prompted. (Lat. stib, under, se- 
cretly; omare, to adorn, hence to 
furnish with things or ideas.) 

28, 29. How wasteful was the airbi- 
tion of these princes, for in their 
haste they have destroyed the very 
means of satisfying that ambition 
— they have caused their father to 
be murdered, and now have tc flee 
the country. 

ravin up, devour greedily. 

31. Scone, near Perth. The Kings 
of Scotland were crowned there 
from very early times, on a stone 
which was brou^t to England by 
Edward I., and which now forms 
part of the coronation chair of the 
sovereigns of England in W^t- 
minster Abbey. 

38. Coimekill : the word means 'the 
cell of Columba' (an Irish mission- 
ary who died about 597 A. D.I. The 
island is now called Icolmkill or 
lona. It was regarded as a sacred 
island, and was the burying-place 
of many kings. It lies off the west 
coast of Scotland, near to Mull. 

40. benison, blessing. (From the 
Lat. benedietioneiHf throu^ the 
Old Fr. be7iei8on.) 



Act III. — Scene I. 



Time— A few weeks later : morning. 

The murder of Banquo is the sub- 
ject of the Third Act Up to this 
time Macbeth has succeeded in all his 
attempts; he has removed Duncan; 
he has secured the crown; he has 
driven the rightful heir into exile. 
To make his hold on the throne more 
sure he now strikes at Banquo and 
his son. Here comes the first check 
to his career, for although Banquo 
falls, Fleance escapes. By this crime, 
and its failure, his self-control is 
sh^en, and when he thinks that he 
sees tlie ghost of Banquo sitting at 
the banquet he betrays himself in 
public. The fourth scene of this act 
is the turning-point of the play. 

4. should not stand in thy pos- 
terity, the kingship would not re- 
main with Macbeth's heirs, but 



would eventually pass to those of 
Banquo. 

7. theirspeeches shine, acondensed 
expression meaning that not only 
had the words of the witches been 
fulfilled, but that hi their fulfilment 
they had brought (apparent) pros- 
perity to Macbeth. 

8. verities, true prophecies. 

10. Sennet, a particular set of notes 
played on a trumpet 

11. our chief guest, Banquo. 

18. all-thing, used as an adverb 
meaning altogether: the word no- 
thinghas been used in a similar way, 
** Nothing afeared of . . . strange 
images of death" (i. 8. 96). meaning 
'*not at all afraid". 

16. Command upon me, a mixture 
of two constructions— "oommand 



8c. L] 



K0TE8. 



89 



me", and "lay your commands 
apon me ". 

16. which, there is no expressed an- 
tecedent to this relative : it is sup- 
plied by the idea contained in 
* conhmand '. 

Although Banquo declares his 
loyalty to Macbeth, we need not 
suppose either that he approves of 
what Macbeth has done, or that he 
is saying what he does not mean. 
He respects the great office that 
MacbeUi holds, and is simply carry- 
ing out the apostle's advice — " Fear 
God. Honour the King ^ 

22. still, always. 

grave and prosperous: Ban- 
quo's counsel had been well 
-weighed before being given, and 
when followed had led to happy 
results. 

26. go not my horse the better: 
notice that go is subjunctive. I 
shall have to borrow an hour or 
two from the night if my horse 
does not go at a better rate, so as 
to make that unnecessary. 

28. twain, an old form of the word 
twOf frequently used in Shake- 
speare and the Bible. 

30. our bloody cousins, Malcolm 
and Donalbain, the sons of Duncan, 
falsely accused of procuring the 
murder of their father. 

bestow'd, settled. 

32. parricide here means 'the act of 
murdering one's father'; it can also 
mean the person who commits such 
a n^nrder. (Lat. pater^ a father, 
and casdo, to kill.) 

33. strange invention, evil stories 
about Macbeth invented by them 
(as he puts it). 

34. therewithal, with that, in addi- 
tion to that: that = the intrigues of 
Malcolm and Donalbain. 

85. Craving us Jointly, requiringour 
joint attention. 

Hie, hasten. (A.S. higiaUy to 
hasten.) 

87. our time does call upon 's, time 
presses us. 

44. while then, till then. 

46. Sirrah, sir, used in a contemp- 
tuous sense. (Has the same origin 

- as sir: Fr. nre; Lat senior: but the 
form girrah comes to us tlirough 
the Icel. rira.) 



48. To be thus: it is nothing to be 
king, unless I can be safe in that 
position. 

49-64. These lines show that Macbeth 
had a double fear of Banquo: he 
feared him because of the im- 
swerving uprightness of his char- 
acter, which, being coupled with a 
high degree of wisdom in deciding 
what action to take (see line 22 in 
this scene) and of bravery in carry- 
ing it out, made him dangerous to 
evil-doers; and he feared him be- 
cause of the prophecy of the witches 
(i. 3. 67) that Banquo's descendants 
should sit on the throne. 

49. in Banquo, with regard to Ban- 
quo. 

56. My Genius, guardian spirit: it 
was an old idea that everyone waa 
watched over by some invisible 
spirit 

57. Mark Antony's: in Plutarch's 
life of Antony, which Shakespeare 
had read, it is said Uiat the angel 
which watched over Antony quailed 
when it came near the angel which 
watched over Caesar. 

This is the origin of the expres- 
sion in the text; but Shakespeare 
probably meant simply that Mac- 
beth felt himself rebuked and 
cowed by the nobility and upright- 
ness of Banquo's character. 

61, 62. fruitless, barren, a crown 
and sceptre that should not pass 
to his descendants. 

^63. with an unlineai hand, by the 
hand of one not belonging to my 
line. 

65. filed, defiled. 

68. mineeternai Jewel, my immortal 
soul. Notice that muie was for- 
merly used instead of my when the 
following word began with a vowel, 
but is now used as a pronoun, while 
my is adjectival. 

72. champion me, 'fight ctgaimt 
me', not 'for me' as the word 
regularly means. 

to the utterance: from the 
French d Voutrance; a combat d 
I'outranee was one in which the 
combatants fought with sharp 
weapons, and only ended with the 
death or yielding of one of them. 

77-79. The murderers are not profes- 
sional assassins; they are soldiers 
who believed that Macbeth had 



90 



MACBETH. 



[Act 



wronged them in some way, per- 
haps kept them from being pro- 
moted in the army. He has per- 
suaded them that Banquo was the 
real author of their troubles. 

80. pass'd in probation with you, 
spent the time (of our first inter- 
view) in proving to you. 

81. borne In hand, buoyed up with 
false hopes. 

88. gospel I'd, filled with the spirit 
of forgiveness taught in the gos- 
pels. 

92. In a list of human beings you 
would no doubt be reckoned among 
the men, just as every poor cur is 
called a dog. 

94. Shoughs, shock-haired dogs, dogs 
with shaggy hair. 

water-rugs, rough water-dogs. 

deml-wolves, a cross between a 
wolf and a dog. 

clept, called. (A.S. cleopiarif to 
call.) 

95. the valued file, the list which 
distinguishes them according to 
their value. 

97. hou8ekeeper,thedogthatguards 
the house. 

99. closed, enclosed. 

100. Particular addition: in the list 
. which takes note of the value of the 

dogs he receives some suitable title, 
and is not merely written down as 
a dog, as in the general catalogue. 

102. file, the list 

107, 108. While Banquo lives we (Mac- 
beth) cannot enjoy good health; if 
he were dead all would be well. 

112. tugg'd, pulled about> buffeted. 



112. with, by, as in line 63 of ^his 
scene. 

114. on 't, of it 

116. distance, alienation, enmity. 

118. my near'st of life, the nearest 
parts to those where my life is, my 
most vital parts. 

The idea running through lines 
116-118 is that of two duellists 
fighting with swords; hence come 
the words 'distance', 'thrusts', 
• nearest of life '. 

120. bid my will avouch it, make my 
mere will the justification of the 
act 

121. for, because ol 

122. but wail, but I must bewail 

123. Who I myself struck down. 
As wlw is Uie object of the verb 
'struck' it should be whom; but in 
Elizabethan times there was less 
regard for strict conformity to the 
rules of grammar than is required 
to-day. 

ISO. the perfect spy o' the time, 

inform you of the exact time when 
you should act 

182. something from, somewhat 
away from : something is an adverb: 
compare the use of nothing in v. 2.. 
20 and v. 4. 2, and see note on line 
IS of this scene. 



1S2, 133. always thought That I 
quire a clearness: it being alwajrs 
kept in mind that I must be clear 
from suspicion. 

134. rubs, properly something pre- 
venting the free running of a ball 
in the game of bowls; hence hin- 
drances, imperfections. 

138. Resolve yourselves apart, go 
away and make up your minds. 



Act III.— Scene 2. 



rini«— Directly after Scene 1. 

8. attend, await 

6. our desire, the crown, in this 
case. 

This hopeless little speech gives 
us a moment's glimpse into the real 
feelings of Lady Macbeth, her deep 
dissatisfaction with the results of 
the crime in which she had taken 
Dart But she hides it instantly on 
her husband's entrance, and is as 
ready as ever to urge him on in the 
path they have chosen. 



10. Using, keeping constantly before 
you, cherishing. 

12. Should be without regard, 
should be disregarded, not con- 
stantly pondered over, 

13. scotch'd : to 'scotch' is properly 
to make slight cuts in a thing; 
hence, to injure without destroy- 
ing. 

14. She Ml close, the cuts will heal 
up. 

16. the frame of things, the anS- 



8a 8.] 



NOTEa 



91 



▼ene as held together by an orderly 
power. 
16. both the worlds, heaven and 
earth. 

SO. our place, the throne. 

tl. Comparing the tortnre which the 
mind suffers in remembering evil 
deeds to the torture of the b(Kiyon 
a rack. 

22. ecstasy, any unnaturally excited 
state of mind. 

23. Notice the repetition of the letter 
/ in 'life's fitful fever'; this device 
is called aUUeration. 

25. Duncan had suffered from 'do- 
mestic malice' in the rebellion 
which Macbeth had put down 
(Act i. Scene 2) and from 'foreign 
levy' in the army of Sweno which 
supported that rebellion. 

27. Qentle my lord, for 'my gentle 
lord ', is not an uncommon order of 
words in Shakespeare: 'good my 
lord ' occurs frequently. 

29. 8o shall I, so will I. 

81. Present him eminence, show 
special attention to him. 

83. flattering streams, streams of 
flattery which we have to pour 
upon Banquo and other courtiers. 

84. vizards, masks; properly the 
front part of a helmet, which hid 
a good deal of the face. 

88. Nature has given them no per- 
petual hold on life. Copy is used 
for copyhold, a form of agreement 
by which one person holds land 
from another for a limited time. 
Banquo and Fleance are spoken 
of as holding their lives from Na- 
ture under an agreement which 
Is limited, and so Lady MacbeUi 
hints they might be put to death. 
This passage is one of many in 
which Shakespeare shows a famili- 
arity with legal terms and ideas 
which has led some to think that 
he was for a time, when a lad, 
employed in a lawyer's office. 

Another and more simple ex- 
planation of the passage is that 



'nature's copy' means the human 
form. Lady Macbeth would Uien 
mean 'They are only human be- 
ings, and therefore will not live for 
ever '. 

41. clolster'd flight: cloisters are 
covered walks round the courts of 
monasteries or colleges, and are 
favourite haunts of the bat. 

Hecate, here simply the goddess 
of night; not thought of in the 
, same way as in ii. 1. 52. 

42. shard-borne beetle: Uie hard 
and shiny wing-cases of the beetle 
are called shards, because they 
somewhat resemble fragments of 
pottery which are also called shards 
or sheards, as in Kiitg Solomon's 
Mines. 

48. yawning peai : peal which Invites 
to sleep. The hum of the beetle is 
compared to the ringing of bells at 
evening. 

46. chuck, chicken, a term of en- 
dearment, a relic of Uie days when 
Macbeth's love for his wife was 
something real and had not been 
eaten up by selfish ambition; it 
stands in painful contrast to the 
horrible deed he was contemplat- 
ing. 

46. seeling, in falconry, was the sew- 
ing together of the eyelids of a 
hawk to make it titurtable : hence 
night is spoken of as blinding the 
eye of day. 

47. Scarf up, cover up, blindfold. 

49. that great bond, the destiny 
foretold for Banquo's descendants. 

61. rooky, where the rooks live; or 
it may be quite a different word, 
meaning mistj/f from an Old Eng- 
lish word roky, connected with the 
Scotch reek, to smoke. (Lang may 
your lum reek = Long may your 
chimney smoke.) 

58. preys, each to his own prey : the 
plural is unusual: compare loves in 
the last scene, line 122. 

55. One evil deed has to be backed 
up by others. 



Act III.— Scene 3. 



Time— Later in the same day as 
Scene 2. 

Macbeth Is so anxious that no hitch 
shall occur in his plot that he sends 
a uiird murderer to assist the other 



two, or to keep watch upon them. 
It has been suggested, with some 

{)robability. that the third murderer 
s Macbeth himself in disguise. 

2, 8. We need not mistrust this third 



92 



MACBETH. 



[Act HZ. 



man, since he. repeats our instruc- 
tions Just as Macbeth directed us. 

6. lated, belated. 

7. to gain the inn betimes. 

10. within the note of expectation, 
on the list of guests expected at 
Macbeth's banquet 

11. go atv>ut, go by a roundabout 
way. 

12-14. These lines are put in to avoid 



the necessity of bringine^ horses on 
to the stage. It must be remem- 
bered that in Shakespeare's time 
no scenery was used in the theatres, 
and when a tragedy, such as Mctc- 
beihf was being acted the sta^re uras 
hung with black. The appearaiM^e 
of a horse in such surroandln^^ 
would have excited laughter r&ther 
than have helped to make the scene 
real. 



Act III. — Scene 4. 



Time — ^Evening of the same day. 

1. degrees, rank, which decided the 
order in which the guests would 
sit 

I, 2. at first And last, once for aU. 

3-6. Lady Macbeth sits in her chair 
of state while her husband moves 
about among the guests. 

6. require her weicome, ask her to 
welcome us to her side. 

II. large, free, unrestrained. 

12. Banquo's murderer stands at the 
entrance to the banquet-hall, which 
would be covered by a curtain, so 
that Macbetii could speak to him 
without attracting the notice of 
those within. 

14. The blood is better outside you 
than inside him : the grammatical 
mistake of putting he for him is 
probably due to the fact that the 
preposition follows the word it 
governs instead of coming before 
it 

19. nonpareil, one who has no equal. 

21. my fit, the agony of terror to 
which he is subject when he re- 
members the prophecy of the 
witches. 

23. the casing air, the air that sur- 
rounds and encloses everything. 

25. Made a fellow - prisoner with 
doubts and fears that give me no 
rest: saucy = pungent, biting. 

32. We'll talk to each other again. 

S3, give the cheer, lead the festive 
merriment. 

83-36. If you do not repeatedly bid 
your guests welco^me you make them 
as uncomfortable as if they were 
expected to pay for their dinner. 

84. a-making, the 'a' is a preposi- 
tion, contracted from the A.S. an or 
oUy which often corresponds to the 
modem tn. 



86. From thence, when away from 
home. 

40. We should have had all that is 
honourable in the country under 
one roof. 

42. Who, as the object of the verb 
challenge, should be whom, 

42, 43. 'I trust that Banquo's absence 
is due to his own act (even thon^rh 
I must regard that as unkind) 
rather than to any mischance which 
may have befallen him.' A hypo- 
critical speech which is flUy re- 
warded by the horror which falls 
upon Macbeth when he tfahiks that 
he sees Banquo's ghost 

46. The chair which appears enxpky 
to everyone else seems to Macbeth 
to be occupied by Banquo's ghost : 
but on first looking nmnd for a 
seat in response to B^dss's invitation 
he only notices that there is no 
vacant place, and it is not till line 
49 that he recognizes the form of 
the man he has murdered. This 
gradual recognition of the ghost is 
a masterly touch. 

66. upon a thought, as quick as 
thought, in a moment. 

67. extend his passion, prolong his 
seizure. 

68. Having quieted the guests and 
made them resume the feast Lady 
Macbeth, speaking in low tones 
and aside, strains every nerve to 
bring her husband back to his 
ordinary mind. 

60. O proper stuff I What down- 
right nonsense ! 

68. flaws, properly gusts of wind, 
hence outburst^ of excited fancy. 

64. to, comi>ared to. 

66. Authorized by, vouched for hj. 

68. Macbeth was gazing at the chair 
in which he saw the i^ost of 



8a 4.] 



KOTES. 



93 



Banqno, but which appeared empty 
to all the rest 

60. When Macbeth thought he saw 
the dagger on the night when he 
murdered Duncan he was able, by 
an effort of will, to banish the illu- 
sion from his mind (ii. 1. 47). His 
imagination is now less under con- 
trol ; although there is more need 
for self-command he cannot pull 
himself together. 

71. charnel-houses, houses for hold- 
ing dead bodies. (From same root 
as cafmal, Lat. caro^ camis, flesh.) 

71-73. We may as well leave dead 
bodies to be eaten by the birds if 
they are going to come out again 
from the places where we have 
buried them. 

76. Before the laws of men cleansed 
the commonwealth from violence 
and made it gentle. 

Notice the way in which the ad- 
jective gentle is used, describing 
the condition of the ' weal ', after 
it liad been purged. This use is 
called proleptic, i.e. taking before- 
hand. 

weal, the state, the common- 
wealth. 

81. twenty mortal murders on 
their crowns, twenty deadly 
wounds on their heads, a remini- 
scence of the 'twenty trenched 
gashes' on the head of Banquo, 
mentioned in lines 27, 28 of this 
scene. 

85. muse, wonder. 

90. Notice again how the hypocritical 
expression of the desire for Banquo's 
presence is immediately fulfilled, to 
Macbeth's confusion, by the appear- 
ance of his ghost. The actual entry 
would take place with the mention 
of his name, but the stage-direction 
was usually put a little earlier as a 
warning to the actor to be ready. 
So also in line 41. 

91, 92. We long to drink the health 
of Banquo and of you all, and to 
wish all good wishes to you all. 

98. Avaunt, begone. (Fr. en avant, 
forward !) 

95. specu lation, look of intelligence. 

101. arm'd, cased in armour, Le. its 
thick hide. 

Hyrcan : Hjrrcania was Uie name 
of an undefined district lying south 
of the Caspian Sea. Vergil (Aeneid 



iv. 367) makes Dido speak of the 
" Hyrcanian tigresses ". 

102. but that, the form of Banquo. 

105. If trembling I inhabit then : 
this line has given rise to a great 
deal of discussion, but it is still un- 
certain what Shakespeare meant by 
it. If we accept the words as they 
stand the best meaning we can give 
them is, ' if 1 then dwell in a state 
of trembling', 'continue tremb- 
ling '. Of other readings that have 
been suggested the best is "if, 
trembling, I inhibit thee", i.e. 
warn thee off, refuse to fight thee. 

106. The baby of a girl, a mere doll. 

109. broke, for broken: see note on 
i. 4. 3. 

110. admired, wondered at 

111. overcome, come over, over- 
shadow. 

112, 113. "I cannot understand my 
own state of mind when I see you 
unmoved by this terrible sight." 

owe, possess. 

119. Stand not: do not wait to go 
out in the order of your rank, as 
would be usual at court. 

121. Notice the marked change in 
Lady Macbeth's manner after the 
guests have gone. While they were 
present she has tried to the utmost, 
even with taunts, to prevent her 
husband from betraying himself. 
Now that she Is alone with him 
she utters no word of reproach; 
she speaks only three short, tired 
sentences, and the last of these is 
one of gentle pity for the man who 
is trying to talk himself into cour- 
age again. 

124. Augurs, in modern spelling, 
augurvea ; the discovery or foretell- 
ing of facts by observations upon 
birds. 

understood relations, mystical 
connections between things, under- 
stood only by a few. 

125. magot-pies, an uncontracted 
form m magpie. (Magot-=Fr. mar- 
aot, a familiar form of Marguerite, 
both used to denote a magpie. Pie 
=Lat. pica, a magpie : so that the 
English form contains the name of 
the bird twice.) 

choughs, a kind of jackdaw. 

126. What is the night? How goes 
the night? 

127. at odds with, contending with. 



94 



MACBETH. 



[Act m 8a 6. 



128. How say'st thou that? What 
do you think of the fact that : The 
next line shows that Macbeth is 
not asking his wife whether Mac- 
duff has refused to come, as the 
words might seem to mean at first 
sight 

186-138. Macbeth compares his course 
of action since he came to the throne 
to a man wading the ford of a ilTer. 

188. as g;o o'er, as going over to the 
other side. 



The Infinitive go is used to corre- 
spond with Uie gerund returning. 

140. Which must be carried into 
action before I have time to jmn- 
der over them. 

142. self-^buse, self-delusion: Mac- 
beth now thinks that the ghost was 
conjured up by his own imagina- 
tion. 

148. The fear which possesses the 
man who is not used to crime, 
whose conscience is not hardened 
by practice. 



Act III.— Scene 6. 



3^ni0— The night following upon the 
same day. 

There are strong reasons for be- 
lieving that this scene was not written 
by Shakespeare, but was inserted by 
some later writer, probltbly Middle- 
ton. 

1. Hecate, another name for Diana, 
who was sometimes represented as 
a goddess of the lower world. See 
note on ii. 1. 62. 

angerly, angrily. 

2. beldams, properly means 'fine 



ladies (Fr. beZIe dame), but was used 
in a contemptuous way. 

7. close, secret. 

16. Acheron, the name of a river 
in Greece, supposed to lead to the 
lower world; but the name came 
to be applied to the lower world 
itself. 

24. profound, having deep and mys- 
terious qualitiea 

26. sleights, arts. 

82. security, a false feeling of secur- 
ity, carelessness. 



Act III.— Scene 6. 



The time of this scene is not in 
agreement with the course of the 
play. After the banquet (Act iii. 
Scene 4) Macbeth says that Macduff 
has refused to come to court when 
bidden, but knows nothing of his 
fiight to England. The next morn- 
ing Macbeth visits the witches (Act 
iv. Scene 1), and it is only after his 
interview with Uiem that messengers 
arrive with the news of Macduff's 
fiight This scene then, coming as 
it does between those mentioned 
above, should take place early on 
the morning after the banquet Yet 
it is said (lines 87-89) that the report 
of what Macduff has gone to do in 
England has roused Macbeth to pre- 
pare for war. An interval of some 
few days at least must be allowed 
for this. 

Notice the ironical tone which Len- 
nox adopts: he means much more 
than he saya 

1. have but hit your thoughts, 
have Just suggested that my idev 
agree with yours. 



4. marry, a corruption of ' by Mary *, 
t.e. the Virgin Mary. An old form 
of swearing which, by Shakespeare's 
time, had become an almost un- 
meaning expression. 

8. Who cannot want the thought : 
double negatives, in which the two 
negative forms are used to inten- 
sify, not to counteract, one an- 
other, are not uncommon in Shake- 
speare. In i. 4. 80. Duncan says : 

yoDle Banquo, 
That hast no less deserved, nor 

must be known 
No less to have done so ; 
In a similar way tiie words tannot 
and vfant form a kind of double 
negative, for v>ant=not to haveX, 
The meaning in modem English 
is expressed by leaving out one of 
the negatives—' Who can want the 
thought?' t'.e. 'Who can fail to 
think?' 

21. from broad words, because of 
his plain-spoken remarks (about 
the murders of Duncan and Ban- 
quo). 



Act IV. 8& L] 



NOTES. 



95 



21, 22. fail'd His pretence, failed to 
be present. 

25. the due of birth, the crown, 
which was Malcolm's 'due' be- 
cause he was the eldest son of 
Duncan. 

27. the most pious Edward, Ed- 
ward the Confessor. 

29. his high respect, the high re- 
spect in which he is held. 

SO. upon his aid, for the purpose of 
his aid. 

31. Siward, Earl of Northunibria : 
he had distinguished himself in 
Edward's service by suppressing 
Godwin's rebellion. Duncan had 
married Siward's daughter. 

85. The order of words is curious : it 
has been proposed to read : 
' Our feasts and banquets free from 
bloody knives'. 



36. free honours, distinctions freely 
and honourably bestowed. 

38. exasperate : a form of the past 
participle taken direct from the 
perfect participle passive of the 
Latin verb, without the addition of 
ed. It is of course only peimissible 
in poetry. 

40. absolute, decisive. 

The 'Sir, not I', is, of course, 
Macduff's answer to the messenger, 
though the words read as if the 
messenger said them. 

41. cloudy, frowning. 

me, the 'ethic dative' of the 
person interested in the action. 

48, 49. The natural order is, ' our 
country suffering under a hand 
accursed*. 



Act IV. — Scene I. 



Time — The morning after the ban- 
quet (Act iii. Scene 4). 

The Fourth Act is the shadow of 
the coming retribution. Macbeth 
goes to consult the witches; the 
words he hears in their cavern are 
only meant to lure him to his doom. 
The cruel and useless murder of 
Macduff s wife and children makes 
this doom more certain ; and at the 
end of the Act we hear of the pre- 
parations which will bring retribu- 
tion upon him. 

There is a curious parallel, which, 
so far as I am aware, has not been 
noticed before, between Macbeth's 
visit to the witches and Saul's visit 
to the witch of Endor (I Sam. xxviil. 
7-25). Both kings were in a desperate 
state of mind, resulting from their 
own evil deeds. Both hear their 
doom from apparitions raised by the 
witches. Both leave the place no 
happier than they came to it. Both 
are killed in battle soon after, and 
succeeded by a king of another line. 
The similarity is the more noteworthy 
since Holinshed furnishes no more 
material for this scene than the sent- 
ence, "And suerlie herevpon had he 
put Makduffe to death, but that a 
certeine witch, whoroe hee had in 
great trust, had told that he should 
neuer be slaine with man borne of 
anie woman, nor vanquished till the 
wood of Bemane came to the castell 
of DuDsinane". The details of the 



scene, then, are certainly not drawn 
from Holinshed, but appear to have 
been invented by Shakespeare; and 
it seems not unlikely that this story 
of Saul and the witch of Endor may 
have been in his mind when writing 
it 

1. brinded, the same word as brin- 
dled; streaked. 

2. hedge-pig, hedge-hog. 

8. Harpier, meant to be the name of 
- a spirit : perhaps a corruption of 
Harpy. 

8. SweJter'd venom, poison that 
has come out from the toad like 
sweat. ' Swelter ' is generally used 
of the effect of heat. 

12. Fiiiet, a strip cut off. 

The repetition of the / in fillet 
and fenny, and of the b in boil and 
bake (line 14), is another instance 
of alliteration. See note on iii. 
2. 28. 
14. newt, a small lizard. The word 
is properly ewt or ^t; the n has 
become attached to it through 
speaking of an ewt. 

16. fork, forked tongue, 
biind-worm, the slow-worm: it 

has no sting, but its long tongue is 
often ignorantly mistaken for one. 

17. howiet, owlet, a little owl. 

28. Powdered mummy was often 
used as a medicine in the Aliddle 
Ages. 



96 



MACBETH. 



[Act IV. 



23. maw and gulf, stomach and 
gullet (throat). 

24. ravin'd, ravenous; or it may 
mean gorged with eating. 

28. Sliver'd, sliced off. (Connected 
with slit and slice.) 

30. chaudron, entrails. 

84. baboon's : Uie verse requires the 
accent to be on the first syllable. 

36-43. The lines enclosed in brackets 
were probably not in the play as 
Shakespeare wrote it. 

40. The song is found in full in Mid- 
dleton's play of The Witch, a fact 
which helps to prove that Shake- 
speare's play has been meddled 
with by that writer. 

47. conjure, accented on the first 
syllable: it is used in the sense 
of 'adjure', 'cause to swear'. In 
modem English conjure' is used 
in this sense. 

50. yesty, foaming like yeast. 

51. navigation, used for ships. 

52. bladed corn, com in the blade, 
before it has grown to be com in 
the ear. 

iodged, laid low. 

56. germens, fruitful seeds: but 
the words are used with a sym- 
bolical sense; the meaning is, 
'though the processes of nature 
are thrown into utter confusion '. 

57. sicken, has grown disgusted with 
its own work. 

62. Her nine farrow, nine young 
pigs. It is curious to notice the 
connection between this word and 
the word pork, tiius : /arrow comes 
from A.S. fearh, a pig : Uie Middle 
High German word is varch : Ger- 
man, ferkel; Lat. porcus, from 
which comes pork. 

62. sweaten, an irregular form of 
the past participle. 

65. deftly, cleverly. 

By the armed head is meant 
Macbeth's head, which was cut off 
by Macduff; the bloody child re- 
presents Macduff; and the child 
crowned, Malcolm. 

71. Hast truly expressed my fear. 

78. more potent, a hint that Mac- 
duff would in the end prevail over 
Macbeth. 

79. What fear need I have of thee? 

81. Macbeth thought thatthe promise 
which had just been given to him 



made him safe from MacdalT, as 
from every otiier man. Yet he 
would make certain that Fate 
would fulfil this promise by eiAying 
Macduff. 
86. the round, a crown. 

90. BIrnam wood. Bimam JElill, 
from which the wood has no-w dis- 
appeared, is near Dnnkeld. 

Dunsinane hill, can be seen 
from Bimam Hill, about tuvelve 
miles away. Dunsinane is aboat 
seven miles from Perth. 

92. impress, press into his service. 
((Compare the word press-gang). 

98. bodements, prophecies. 

96. Live as long as nature permits 
him (i.e. not die a violent death). 

97. mortal custom, the end which 
comes to every man — death. 

108. Eight kings of Scotland are said 
to have descended from Banquo, 
the last being James VI., who in 
1603 became James I. of England. 

114. till the crack of doom, tUl the 
thunders of the judgment-day are 
heard. 

118. The two-fold balls refer to the 
double coronation of James, first 
at Scone as James VI. of Scotland, 
then at Westminster as James I. of 
England. 

The treble sceptres represent 
the three kingdoms of England, 
Scotland, and Ireland. 

120. biood-bolter'd : with his hair 
clotted or matted with blood. The 
word boltered is still used in the 
Warwickshire dialect in this sense. 

122-129. This speech was probably 
put into the play by Middleton. 
Hecate retired at line 40, and 
nothing has been said about her 
reappearance. 

124. sprites, spirits. 

181. aye, for ever. 

141. anticipatest, preventest No- 
tice that in Shakespeare's time 
prevent was used in the sense of 
go heSore, anticipate, as in the 
!Prayer Book, " Prevent us, O Lord, 
in iJl our doings", and Psalm cxiz. 
147, " I prevented the dawning of 
the morning ". 

142. flighty, fleeting. 

o'ertook, for o'ertaken. See 
note on L 4. 8. 
150. trace him In his line, follow 
him in his lineage. 



9c x^ 



NOTES. 



97 



Act IV.— Scene 2. 



Time— Another day, soon after 

Scene 1. 

7. titles, all to which he has a title 
or claim. 

9. the natural touch, the care for 
one's kindred which is implanted 
in us by nature. 

9-11. The natural history is at fault. 
The owl does not take young birds 
ont of their nests, nor is it likely 
that the wren would fight i^ainst 
an owL 

11. Her youne ones (being) in her 
nest, a nominative absolute. 

14. Ross was related to Lady Mac- 
duff. 

17. The fits o' the season, the 
changing circumstances of the 
time. 

18, 19. When we are counted traitors 
though we do not know ourselves 
to be such. 

19, 20. When we believe rumours be- 
cause they accord with our fears. 

22. Each way and move : it is best 
to take move as a verb, meaning 



'toss about'. But it has been 
suggested to read 'each way and 
none', meaning that although we 
are driven in every direction we 
made no headway. 

25. Speaking to Macduff's little boy. 

28-30. If I were to stay I should 
shame myself by weeping. 

34. lime, bird-lime. 

35. gin, a trap or snare. (Shortened 
from Middle Eng. engin, a con- 
trivance: Lat. ingenium, natural 
capacity, also an invention.) 

36. They (the traps) are not set for 
poor birds in our everyday life. 

47. swears and lies, takes an oath 

and does not carry it out. 
56. enow, enough. 

65. Though I am perfectly acquainted 
with your honourable name and 
character. 

66. doubt, fear. 

69, 70. It is cruel to frighten you 
thus : it would be worse to leave 
you unwarned of your danger. 



Act IV.— Scene 3. 



Time — A few weeks later. 

Malcolm has now been some time 
in England, and Edward the Con- 
fessor is pledged to help him in 
driving Macbeth from the throne. 
Macb^ has several times attempted 
to get him into his power, but with- 
out success (lines 106-108). Now 
Macduff has joined him, but Mal- 
colm has grown suspicious, and is 
afraid that he may be only another 
secret emissary from Macbeth sent 
to entrap him. He therefore de- 
scribes himself in very black colours 
to see whether Macduff's patriotism 
is genuine, or whether he can find 
evidence of any plot. 

3. mortal, deadly, as in i. 5. 39. 

4. Bestride, stand over in an attitude 
of defence. 

birthdom, mother country. 

6. that, so that. 

8. Similar expressions of grief. 

10. As suitable opportunities present 
themselves. 

11. spoke, see note on i. 4. 8. 

(M113) 



12. sole name, mere name. 

14, 15. You might earn his gratitude 

by betraying me to him. 
15. and wisdom, and it is wisdom. 

19, 20. Even a good man may fall 
away from virtue when a king's 
commands are laid upon him. 

21. If you are honourable my mere 
thoughts cannot make you other- 
wise. 

23, 24. Gk>odneBS must always look 
like goodness, even though evil 
tries to imitate It in appearance. 

24. Macduff despairs because he is 
not trusted by Malcolm. 

26. rawness, haste. Tennyson speaks 
of "Raw haste, half sister to de- 
lay". 

Macduff's real reason was that 
he put his duty to his countxy be- 
fore his private interests; if he 
had waited to bring his family with 
him he might never have been able 
to reach England at all. 
29, 30. If I seem to be suspicious, do 
not count it as dishonour to your- 

G 



98 



MACBETH. 



[Act IV. So. 3. 



self, but merely as a necessary way 
of securing my own safety. Other 
arrivals from Scotland had made 
Malcolm suspicious. See lines 
106-108 of this scene. 

84. affeer'd (quite a different word 
from ajeard) : a law term, meaning 
' confirmed '. 

The sense is, * Poor country, you 
must endure your wrongs; their 
legal title to plague you has been 
confirmed by the very man who 
should have removed them '. 

88. I am suspicious, but no more 
than that: I have certainly not 
made up my mind that you are a 
traitor. , 

39. I think, I ponder on the fact that. 

48. more sundry ways, in more 
various ways. 

66. confineiess, boundless. 

67. top, overtop, outdo. 

66. ill-composed affection, disposi- 
tion made up of evil elements. 

67. staunch less, not to be satisfied. 
69. his, one man's. 

76. The sword of our slain kings, 
the sword by which they have been 
slain. 

77. foisons, plenty, abundance. 
(La*, fusionem, a pouring out; 
f under e, to pour.) 

78. Of your mere own, your own 
absolute property. 

portable, endurable. 

79. If balanced by some virtues. 

81. verity, truthfulness. 

82. perseverance, accented on the 
second syllable. Pera^ver is al- 
ways accented in the same way in 
Shakespeare. 

84. no relish of them, no natural 
taste for them. 

87. Not to make hell better, but to 
get rid of concord from earth. 

88. Uproar, set in uproar; not known 
elsewhere as a verb. 

97. blaspheme his breed, slander 
his parentage. 

100. Died every day she lived, lived 
in constant preparation for death. 
Cf. 1 CJor. XV. 81, "I die daily". 

104. Child of integrity: MacduiTs 
indignant outburst could never 
have come from a traitor; only a 
truly sincere man would have 
spoken words like that. 



107. trains, devices, snares: Mac- 
beth had sent various messengers 
to entrap Malcolm into his ix>wer. 

114. For, as. 

124. at a point, fully prepared. 

126, 126. May our prospect of success 
be as great as is the Justice of our 
cause. 

131. stay his cure, are waiting to be 
healed by him. 

181, 182. convinces The great assay 
of art, baffles all attempts to cure 
it by medicine. (Lat. convineere, to 
conquer.^ See also i. 7. 64. 

184. presently, immediately. 

186. the evil, scrofula, often called 
the king's evil. It was believed 
that anyone who suffered from this 
disease would be cured if touched 
by a king or queen. Edward the 
Confessor was the first sovereign 
to whom this power was attributed. 
Later kings, and among them James 
I., continued the custom of touch- 
ing people to cure them, and the 
passage is no doubt introduced as 
a compliment to tiiis sovereign. It 
has no proper connection with the 
play. 

141. mere despair, complete de- 
spair. 

142. The practice of hanging a gold 
coin on the necks of the people 
who were to be cured by the king's 
touch was much later than the time 
of Edward the Confessor. 

stamp, coin. Coins were used 
for this purpose until the reign of 
Charles II. From that time a 
special medal was struck. The one 
which Queen Anne hung round the 
neck of Dr. Johnson is to be seen 
In Uie British Museum. 

148. spoken, said. 

162. makes, see note on ii. 8. 76. 

168. Is the condition of Scotland the 
same? 

168. not mark'd, so common that 
they pass unnoUced. 

169. modern, commonplace, ordi- 
nary. 

ecstasy is used In the sense of 
any violent emotion. 

160. for who: the pronoun who often 
remains uninfiected in Shakespeare. 
It must of course be parsed as Ob- 
jective though not written wham. 



Acty. SclL] 



NOTES. 



99 



162. or ere, before, 
relation, description. 

163. nice, exact, minute. 

161. Anyone who tella of a crime 
enacted an hour before is hissed 
for bringing stale news. 

163. teems, brings forth, with the 
added idea of abundance. 

171. heavily, sadly. 

172. were out, were in open rebel- 
lion. 

173. witnett'd, made credible. 

174. power, troops. 

175. the time of help, the time when 
your help would be of great value. 

177. doff, put off (shortened from do 
of; in the same way don is a con- 
traction of do on). 

180. none, there is none. Ck>mpare 
line 15 of this scene. 

181. gives out, proclaims, speaks of. 

184. latch, catch. Both words are 
also used as nouns, for we speak of 
the Match', or the 'catch' of a 
door. 

185. a fee-grief, a grief that has a 
single owner. Fee comes from /ie/i 
a feudal term for a piece of land 
held from a superior. 

195. quarry, dead bodies, properly 
of animals killed in hunting. (Lat. 
eorium, hide; quarry, a stone-pit, 
is quite a different word: it comes 
from Lat quadrare, to square.) 



199. Whispers is often used without 
a preposition in Shakespeare: e.g. 
*He came to whisper Wolsey' 
(Henry VIII. i. 1. 179). 

o'erfraught, overladen. 

201. must be from thence, was 
obliged to be away from the place. 
MtLst is past tense. 

205. He, Malcolm. He cannot under- 
stand the depth of my grief since 
he has no children of his own. 

208. fell, cruel, fierce; as in Iv. 2. 70. 

209. Dispute it, do not tamely accept 
this state of things, but fight against 
it. 

211, 212. such That, in modern 

English such is followed by the 
relative as. 

218. Convert, change. In modem 
English 'convert' is not used in- 
transitively, as it is here. 

221. intermission, anything put be- 
tween, hindrance, delay. (Lat. 
inter, between, mittere, to send.) 

226. We only need to take leave of 
the king; or it may mean, we only 
need his permission to set out 

227. Is ripe for shaking, like fruit 
on a tree, ready to be shaken from 
where it hangs. 

228. Put on their instruments, are 
girding on their swords for Uie con- 
flict 



Act V. — Scene I. 



Time — Another day, not long after 
the last scene. We now come to 
the retribution. Lady Macbeth 
has not appeared since Uie Ban- 
queting Scene (Act III. Sc. 4); she 
and her husband have drifted 
apart. The memory of the part 
she had played in the murder of 
Duncan is crushing her, and in her 
sleep, when her strong will is 
powerless, she lives over again the 
terrible deeds which have made her 
queen: but the strain is too great 
for her physical strength, and it 
kills her. Macbeth clings till the 
last moment to the prophecies 
which really foretell his doom. 
Whatever strength of mind he had 
is gone, and he wavers between a 
hopeless gloominess and a des- 
perate recklessness. When the 



last straw to which he can hold Is 
swept away, he falls by the hand 
of Macduff. 

3. went Into the field, led out his 
forces, took the field. 

4. nightgown, see note on ii. 2. 70. 

9. efTects of watching, the actions 
of waking hours. 

10, 11. actual performances, actions 
as contrasted with words. 

S9> you mar all: she is now thinking 
of Macbeth's conduct at the ban- 
quet (Act III. Sc. 4). 

41. spoke, see note on i. 4. 8. 

43,44. ail the perfumes, <ftc. : re- 
member what Lady Macbeth said 
Just after the murder of Duncan, 
"A little water clears us of this 
deed"(ii. 2. 67). 



100 



HACBBTH. 



[ActV. 



48. the dignity of her position as 
queen. 

56. on 't, of his. 

68. the means of all annoyance, 
everything which she might use to 
harm herselt 



69. still, always. 

70. mated, bewildered. (The Per- 
sian words 9hdh mdt, 'the king is 
dead', used in the game of chess, 
gave rise to our check-mate, the 
latter half of which is the word 
used above.) 



Act v.— Scene 2. 



Time—A few weeks later. 

I. power, forces, as in iv. 3. 174. 

3. dear causes, the causes which 
affect them each so closely. The 
murder of Duncan affected Mal- 
colm : the murder of his wife and 
children affected Macduff. 

4, 6. Would rouse even a dead man 
to take part in the bloody strife. 

4. bleeding is an adjective to 'a- 
larm'. 

alarm, call to arms: Shake- 
speare speaks of bleeding vxtr 
(Rich. II. iii. 3. 94X but here the 
word is less naturally applied to 
the summons to war. 

6. mortified, dead. 

Birnam wood and Dunslnane 
(line 12) are mentioned in order to 
prepare the way for the fulfilment 
of the prophecies of the apparitions 
(iv. L 89-91). 

7. Donalbain had fled to Ireland 
after the murder of his father; 
Malcolm to England (ii. 3. 119, 
120). 

8. file, list: used also in iii. 1. 05. 

10. un rough, without any hair on 
their chins. 

II. Protest, show forth, display. 



12. Dunsinane: the accent is here 
on the first syllable. In iv. 1. 90 
it was on the second. 

18. lesser, a double comparative: 
an adverb here; an adjective in 
i. 8. 66. 

16, 16. As a man afflicted with the 
dropsy cannot buckle his belt, so 
Macbeth cannot control the affairs 
of his country.  

18. minutely, every minute. It is 
best to reg^uxl it as an adverb to 
* upbraid'. 

20. Nothing, an adverb ; ' not at all*. 
(So also in v. 4. 2.) Compare »ome- 
thing, iii. 1. 132. 

28. to recoil and start, we should 
use the gerund, 'for recoiling and 
starting'. The infinitive was used 
by Elizabethan writers with more 
freedom than in modem English. 

24. all that is within him. all the 
memories of his treachery and 
violence. 

27. the medicine of the sickly 
weal; the doctor who will cure 
the commonwealth, now lying sick. 
Bhake8i)eare uses 'medicine' more 
than once in the sense of ' physi- 
cian'. 



Act v.— Scene 3. 



Time— The same day. 

1. let them fly all : Macbeth's sup- 
porters have begun to desert him. 

3. taint, be infected. 

5. Ail mortal consequences, all the 
issues of this mortal life. 

pronounced, have made this 
announcement to me. 

8. epicures, men fond of eating and 
drinking. Epicurus was a Greek 
philosopher, who lived about 800 
B.C., and taught that pleasure is 
the great end of life ; but his idea 



of pleasure was a much higher one 
than that of his followers. 

10. sag, droop. It is used of the 
curved droop of telegraph wires 
between the poles on which they 
are fastened. 

11. Macbeth's violent language shows 
how completely his self-control has 
broken down. 

loon, slow, clumsy fellow. It Is 
the name of a species of water- 
bird, and is used in the same 
uncomplimentary way as booby, 
goose, owl. 



8c. 6.] 



NOTES. 



101 



15. lily-llver'd, cowardly. 

patch, a fool, so called because 
the fools or jesters wore a patched 
coat, made up of different colours. 

20. push, attack of the English 
forces. 

21. Will make my seat on the throne 
secure or will dethrone me once 
for all. 

Another reading is, 'Will cheer 
me ever or disease me now*. 

22. 23. My life which should be in 
the sprim^ime of its manhood is 
already snowing the decay of au- 
tumn. 

tear, withered. (A. S. tedr^ dry ; 
sedrian, to dry up.) 

S5. moe, an older form of more. It 
occurs several times in the Author* 
ized Version of the Bible as pub- 
lished in 1611 (e.g. as f/u), 2 Sam. 



V. 13), but has been altered to more 
in later editions. 

85. ski rr, scour. 

37. your patient. Lady Macbeth. 

43. obiivious, causing forgetfulness. 

44. There is probably some corrup- 
tion in the text^ but no satisfactory 
idteration has been suggested. 

60. Come, sir, to the man who is 
putting on his armour. 

52. pristine health, the health she 
formerly enjoyed. 

64. Pull 't off: his armour: these 
useless questions to the doctor and 
the changeableness of his purpose 
show how shaken and ill-controlled 
his mind was. 

58. Bring it after me; his armour. 

59. bane, ruin, destruction. 



Act v.— Scene 4, 



Tims— The next day. 

1 chambers wiil be safe, private 
homes will be free from Macbeth's 
spies and murderers. 

nothing, an adverb, as in v. 2. 
20. 

6, 7. Prevent those who first see us 
from correctly reporting our num- 
bers. 

11. Whenever they can find the op- 
portunity. 

12. more and iess, great and small. 



14, 15. Let our judgment on the 
position of affairs await the result 
of the battle. 

14. censures, opinions, judgments. 
(Lat ceiisere, to give an opinion.) 

15. the true event, the actual re- 
sult. 

18. What we can count as our own 
and what we must reckon as gain 
to Macbeth. 

19, 20. Men may talk in guesses about 
what they doubtfully expect to 
happen, but it is only action that 
can decide the issue. 



Act V. — Scene 5. 



Time— The same day. 

5. forced, reinforced. See v. 3. 1, 49. 

6. dareful. daringly : this is the only 
place in which Shakespeare uses 
the word. 

9. forgot, see note on i. 4. 3. 

10. my senses would have cooi'd : 
the meaning is much the same as 
when we say, 'my blood would 
have run cold'. 

11. fell of hair, skin (of the head) 
with the hair on it. (Lat peUis, 
skin, hide.) 

12. treatise, tale, story. 
18. As, as if. 



14. Direness, horror: this is the 
only place where Shakespeare uses 
this word. 

17. The news of his wife's death 
rouses scarcely any feeling in Mac- 
beth. The memory and misery of 
their crime is weighing upon hus- 
band and wife with such crushing 
force as to make them quite unable 
to help one anotiier. 

18. such a word, as Seyton had just 
spoken. 

19-28. The main idea of these lines 
is the hopeless weariness and emp- 
ty vanity of life. Do not forget 
that they are spoken by a man who 



102 



MACBETH. 



[Act V. 



has made life worthless by taking 
selflshness for his guiding principle. 

23. dusty death : compare the words 
of the burial service, "Dust to 
dust". 

brief candle, the 'yital spark' 
of life. 

24, 26. Another illustration drawn 
from the stage. See also ii. 4. 6. 

80. Gracious my lord : see note on 
iii. 2. 27. 

84. Macbeth's violence is, of course, 
due to his remembering the pro- 
phecy of the apparition in iv. 1. 
89-91. 

87. this three mile : we should con- 
sider such an expression to be bad 



grammar, but Elizabethan writers 
used much greater freedom in such 
matters than is allowed to-day. 

40. cling thee, shrivel thee up. 

sooth, true. 

42. pull In resolution, rein in, check 
my former confidence. 

47. avouches, declares. 

49. gin, begin. 

60. estate, settled order. 

61. wrack, -wreck, general destruc- 
tion. 

62. harness, armour. We read of 
Ahab being smitten " between the 
joints of the harness" (1 Kings, 
xxii. 34). 



Act V.—Scene 6. 



Time—The same day. 

1. leavy, leafy. 

2. show, appear. See also i. 8. 64. 

uncle, Siward. Holinshed makes 
him Malcolm's grandfather, for 
Duncan married Siward's daughter. 
See note on iii. 6. 81. 



4. battle, battalion, division of an 
army. 

6. upon's, upon us. 

7. If only we should find. 

10. harbl nge rs. heralds, forerunners. 
Used also in 1. 4. 46. 



Act v.— Scene 7. 



Time— The same day. 

1, 2. Macbeth compares himself to a 
bear tied to a stake and ' baited ' 
by dogs. This was a favourite 
sport in olden days. Only a cer- 
tain number of dogs was allowed 
to attack the bear at a time, and 
each ' round ' was called a ' course '. 

7. Than any is, than any that is. 

17. kerns, light-armed soldiers. 
Used also in i. 2. 18. 

18. staves, spears. 

either thou (must fight with 
me). 



20. undeeded, having done no work 
in the fight I^ot found elsewhere 
in Shakesi>eare. 

22. bruited, announced. (Fr. bruit, 
a noise.) 

24. gently render'd, surrendered 
without resistance. 

26. Some of Macbeth's men have 
come over to our side. 

27. itself professes, professes itself, 
declares itself. 

28. 29. foes That strike beside us, 
Scots who had joined Malcolm's 
side. See line 26, above. 



Act V. — Scene 8. 



1. play the Roman fool, commit 
suicide like Cato, Brutus, Antony, 
and other famous Aomans. 

2. whiles I see lives, while I can see 
living men. 

4. A mixture of two constructions. 
'I have avoided thee most of all 
men ' ; ' I have avoided thee more 
than all other men ' (all men else). 



6, 6. This is the only place where 
Macbeth shows anyuiing like gen- 
uine sorrow for his cruel deeds. 

8. Than terms can give the« out, 
than words can describe thee. 

0. Intrenchant, that cannot be cut 

11. vulnerable crests, hebneti that 
can be wounded, or cut into. 



^ 



Sea] 



NOTES. 



103 



14. the angel, used in a bad sense 
for * demon'. 

18. my better part of man, the 
nobler part oi my manhood, my 
courage. 

20. palter, equivocate, speak deceit- 
fully. 

24. gaze, something to be stared at : 
unusual as a noun. 

26. Painted upon a pole, painted 
on a cloth hung on a pole outside a 
travelling show. 

29. baited, he is still thinking of the 
bear. See v. 7. 1. 

84. him : ^ would be grammatically 
correct : perhaps the phrase ' let 
him be damned' was in Shake- 
speare's mind, and gave rise to the 
*him'. 

86. go ofT, die. Taking ojTwas used 
for ' murder ' in i. 7. 20. 

40. but is not wanted after ' only '. 

41-43. He had no sooner shown his 
manly bravery in warfare by not 



shrinking even from such a foe as 
Macbeth than he died. 

52. parted, another word for ' died '. 
See line 36 above. 

54. stands, in Holinshed we read 
that Macbeth's head was stuck on 
a pole. 

55. the time Is free: now that the 
tyrant is dead a period of liberty 
has begun. 

56. pearl, the flower of thy nobility : 
used collectively, and so followed 
by a plural relative in the next 
line. 

61. reckon with, repay. 

65. Those matters which require to 
be treated in accordance with the 
new circumstances in which Scot- 
land finds herself. 

68. Producing forth, bringing out 
to justice. 

71. needful else, other needful 
things. 

75. Scone. See note on ii. 4. 81. 



CLASSIFIED INDEX TO THE 
PRINCIPAL POINTS IN THE NOTES. 



(1) ALLUSIONS. 

(1) Biblical. 

Dying daily, iv. 3. 100. (1 Cor. xv. 31.) 

Golgotha, i. 2. 40. (Matt, xxvii. 33.) 

Lord's anointed temple, ii. 3. 49. (1 Sam. xxiv. 10 and 2 Cor. vL 16.) 

Stones prate, ii. 1. 57. (Luke xix. 40) (?). 

(2) Classical. 



Acheron, iii. 5. 15. 

Bellona, i. 2. 54. 

Gorgon, ii. 3. 53. 

Hecate, iL 1. 52; iii. 2. 41; iii. 5. 1. 



Hyrcania, iii. 4. 101. 
Mark Antony, iii. 1. 57. 
Suicide among the Romans, v. 
8. 1. 



(3) 0eograpliicaL 



Aleppo, i. 3. 7. 
Bimam wood, iv. 1. 90. 
Colmekill, ii. 4. 33. 
Dunsinane hill, iv. 1. 90. 



Forres, i. 3. 39. 
Inverness, i. 4. 42. 
Saint Colme's Inch, i. 2. 61. 
Scone, ii. 4. 31; v. 8. 75. 



(4) Miscellaneous. 

bear-baiting, v. 7. 1, 2. 

beliefs about witches, i. 3. 2, 8, 9. 

bell before execution, ii. 2. 3. 

copyhold, iii. 2. 38. 

coronation of James I., iv. 1. 118. 

curing scrofula by king's touch, iv. 3. 135-145. 

dishonesty of tailors, ii. 3. 13. 

divisions of the brain, i. 7. 65-67. 

Edward the Confessor, iii. 6. 27. 

falconry, ii. 4. 12; iii. 2. 46. 

harvest of 1606, ii. 3. 4, 5. 

mariner's compass, i. 3. 17. 

mummy used as medicine, iv. 1. 23. 

night-draught, ii. 1. 31; ii. 2. 6. 

old proverb, i 7. 45. 

owls as ill-omened, ii. 2. 3; ii. 3. 40. 

passing bell, ii. 1. 62, 63. 

Siward, iii. 6. 31; v. 6. 2. 

stage, i. 3. 128, 129; ii. 4. 6; v. 5. 24, 26. 

three as magic number, i. 3. 

trial of Jesuit, ii. 3. 8. 



CLASSIFIED INDEX. 105 



(2) FAMILIAR AND PROVERBIAL EXPRESSIONS. 

1. When shall we three meet again 

In thunder, lightning, or in rain? i. 1. 1. 

2. doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe, i. 2. 38. 

3. happy prologues to the swelling act 
Of the imperial theme, i. 3. 128. 

4. Time and the hour runs through the roughest day, i. 3. 147. 

5. nothing in his life 
Became him like the leaving it, i. 4. 7. 

6. full of the milk of human kindness, i. 5. 15. 

7. his virtues 

Will plead like angels trumpet- tongued against 
The deep damnation of his taking off, i. 7. 18. 

8. Letting * I dare not' wait upon 'I would*, i. 7. 44. 

9. I dare do all that may become a man; 
Who dares do more is none, i. 7. 46. 

10. We fail ! 

But screw your courage to the sticking place 
And we '11 not fail, i. 7. 59. 

11. The labour we delight in physics pain, ii. 3. 31. 

12. Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope 
The Lord's anointed temple, ii. 3. 48. 

13. In the great hand of Grod I stand, ii. 3. 112. 

14. After life's fitful fever he sleeps well, iii. 2. 23. 

15. Now good digestion wait on appetite, 
And health on both ! iii. 4. 38. 

16. Stand not upon the order of your going. 
But go at once, iii. 4. 119. 

17. Security 

Is mortal's chiefest enemy, iii. 5. 32. 

18. ma'ke assurance double sure, iv. 1. 80. 

19. Curses, not loud but deep, v. 3. 27. 

20. Throw physio to the dogs, I '11 none of it, v. 3. 47. 

21. To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, 
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day, v. 6. 19. 

22. a tale 
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, 
Signifying nothing, v. 5. 26. 



106 



MACBETH. 



(3) GRAMMATICAL POINTS. 
(1) Accent differing from Modem English. 



baboon, iv. 1. 3^. 
ch^tise, i. 5. 25. 



Dunsinane (variable, see on v. 2. 12, and v. 5. 45). 
6b8care, ii. 3. 40. 



odnjure, iv. 1. 47. , perseverance, iv. 3. 82. 

(2) Alliteration. 

li/e's /it/ul /ever, iii. 2. 23. 

Fillet of a/enny snake, 

In the cauldron 6oil and &ake, iv. 1. 13, 14. 

(3) Derivations. 



avaunt, iii. 4. 93. 

beldams, iii. 5. 2. 

benison ii. 4. 40. 

bruited, v. 7. 22. 

censures, v. 4. 14. 

clept, iii. 1. 94. 

convince, i. 7. 64; iv. 3. 131. 

corporal, i. 8. 81. 

doflf, iv. 3. 177. 

farrow, iv. 1. 62. 

fell, V. 5. 11. 

flout, i. 2. 49. 

foisons, iv. 3. 77. 

gin, iv. 2. 35. 

gouts, it 1. 46. 

hie, iii. 1. 35. 

hurly-burly, i. 1. 3. 

'ild, i. 6. 13. 

intermission, iv. 3. 221. 

jutty, i 6. 6. 

largess, ii. 1. 14. 



limbeck, i. 7. 67. 
magot-pies, iii. 4. 125. 
mated, v. 1. 70. 
minion, i. 2. 19. 
morrow, ii. 3. 25. 
newt, iv. 1. 15. 
pent-house, i. 3. 20. 
quarry, iv. 3. 195. 
quell, i. 7. 72. 
rooky, iii. 2. 51. 
sear, v. 3. 23. 
sewer, i: 7. 1. 
sirrah, iii. 1. 45. 
sooth, i. 2. 36. 
sprites, ii. 3. 60. 
suborned, ii. 4. 24. 
surcease, i. 7. 4. 
trammel, i. 7. 3. 
utterance, iii. 1. 72. 
vantage, i. 2. 31; L 6. 113. 
wassail, L 7. 64. 



(4) Other words explained. 



abuse, ii. 1. 50; iii. 4. 142. 
addition, i. 3. 106; iii. 1. 100. 
afeard, i. 3. 96; i. 7. 39. 
afifeered, iv. 3. 34. 
all-thing, iii. 1. 13. 
anticipate, iv. 1. 141. 
approve, i. 6. 4. 
aroint, i. 3. 6. 
at a point, iv. 3. 124. 



attenfl, iii. 2. 3. 
augures, iii. 4. 124. 

battle, V. 6. 4. 
birthdom, iv. 3. 4. 
bodements, iv. 1. 93. 
boltered, iv. 1. 120. 
breeched, ii. 3. 98. 
brinded, iv. 1. 1. 



CLASSIFIED INDEX. 



107 



casing, iii. 4. 23. 
champion, iii. 1. 72. 
charnel-houses, iiL 4. 71. 
chaudron, iv. 1. 80. 
choppy, i. 8. 44. 
chnck, iii. 2. 45. 
cling, V. 5. 40. 
cloudy, iii. 6. 41. 
coign, i. 6. 7. 
combustion, ii. 3. 39. 
compt, i. 6. 26. 
compunctious, L 5. 48. 
course, ii. 2. 39. 
coursed, L 6. 21. 

dareful, v. 6. 6. 
dear, v. 2. 3. 
direness, v. 5. 14. 
dudgeon, ii. 1. 46. 
dunnest, i. 5. 49. 

earnest, i. 3. 104. 
enow, ii. 3. 5. 
estate, v. 6. 49. 

fantastical, i. 3. 53, 139. 

fee-grief, iv. 3. 185. 

fell (adj), i. 6. 44; iv. 8. 208. 

fell (noun), v. 6. 11. 

file, iii. 1.95, 102; v. 2. 8. 

filed, iii. 1. 65. 

flaws, iii. 4. 63. 

franchised, ii. 1. 28. 

frieze, i. 6. 6. 

furbished, i. 2. 32. 

gallow-glasses, i. 2. 13. 
germens, iv. 1. 56. 
Graymalkin, i. 1. 8. 

harbinger, i. 4. 45; v. 6. 10. 
harness, v. 5. 52. 
howlet, iv. 1. 17. 

illness, i. 5. 18. 
incarnadine, ii. 2. 61. 
inch, i. 2. 61. 
instruments, iv. 3. 228. 



intrenchant, v. 8. 9. 

kerns, i. 2. 13 ; v. 7. 17. 

laced, ii. 3. 94. 
large, iii. 4. 11. 
latch, iv. 8. 184, 
lated, iii. 3. 6. 
lavish, i. 2. 57. 
limited, ii. 3. 33. 
line, i. 3. 112. 
lodged, iv. 1. 52. 
loon, V. 3. 11. 

mansionry, i. 6. 5. 
marry, iii. 6. 4. 
medicine, v. 2. 27. 
memorize, i. 2. 40. 
metaphysical, L 5. 27. 
mettle, i. 7. 73. 
minutely, v. 2. 18. 
missives, i. 5. 6. 
modern, iv. 3. 159. 
moe, V. 3. 35. 
mortal, i. 5. 39; iii 4. 80; iv. 

3. 3. 
my near'st of life, iii. 1. 118. 

offices, ii. 1. 14. 

owe, i. 3. 76; i. 4. 10; iii. 4. 113. 

Paddock, i. 1. 9. 
pall, i. 5. 49. 
palter, v. 8. 20. 
patch, V. 3. 15. 
pauser, ii. 3. 93. 
peak, i. 3. 28. 
portable, iv. 8. 78. 
posset, iL 2. 6. 
posters, i. 3. 33. 
pretence, ii. 3. 113. 
pretend, ii. 4. 24. 
purveyor, i. 6. 22. 

rapt, 1. 3. 57; i. 3. 142. 
ravin, ii. 4. 28. 
ravined, iv. 1. 24. 
rawness, iv. 8. 26. 



108 



MA CB ET H . 



receipt, i. 7. 66. 
ronyon, i. 3. 6. 
round, i. 5. 26; iv. 1. 85. 
rubs, iii. 1. 134. 

sag, V. 3. 10. 
scotched, iii. 2. 13. 
seated, i. 3. 136. 
seeling, iii. 2. 46. 
sennet, iii. 1. 10. 
se'nnights, i. 3. 22. 
sensible, ii. 1. 36. 
shard, iii. 2. 42. 
uhoughs, iii. 1. 94. 
show, i. 3. 54 ; v. 6. 2. 
sightless, i. 5. 47; i. 7. 23. 
skirr, v. 3. 35. 
sleave, ii. 2. 37. 



slivered, iv. 1. 28. 
sometime, L 6. 11. 
speculation, iii. 4. 05. 
stamp, iv. 3. 142. 

thane, i. 2. 45. 
trains, iv. 3. 107. 

undeeded, v. 7. 20. 
using, iii. 2. 10. 

verities, iii. 1. 8. 
vizards, iii. 2. 84. 

water-rugs, iii. 1. 94. 
weal, iii. 4. 76. 
whiles, L 5. 5; ii. 1. 59. 



(5) MisceUaneouB. 

a, as preposition, iii. 4. 84. 
adjective for adverb (meek), i. 7. 17. 
„ „ (easy), ii. 3. 119. 

as for as if, ii. 2. 28; ii. 4. 17; v. 5. 13. 
as for seeing that, i. 7. 78. 
double comparMive, i. 8. 65; v. 2. 13. 
double negative, i. 4. 30, 31 ; iii. 6. 8. 
ethic dative, iii. 6. 41. 
for for as, iv. 3. 114. 
for for because of, iiL 1. 121. 
him for A^, V. 8. 34. 

infinitive as gerund, iii. 4. 188; v. 2. 23. 
mixture of two constructions, v. 8. 4, 34. 
near as comparative, iL 3. 122. 
nominative absolute, iv. 2. 11. 
nothing as adverb, i. 3. 96 ; v. 2. 20; v. 4. 2. 
of for with, i. 2. 13. 
omission oif antecedent, i. 3. 109; iii. 1. 16. 

preposition {in), iv. 3. 48. 
[of), ii. 2. 33. 
„ (to), ii. 2. 29; iv. 3. 199. 

relative, i. 5. 18 ; v. 7. 7. 

verb, iv. 3. 15; iv. 8. 180; v. 7. 18. 
ope for open, ii. 8. 48. 
other as plural, i. 8. 14. 
„ adverb, i. 7. 77. 



>» 



}» 



» 



it 



M 



CLASSIFIED INDEX. 109 

participles: hroike^ ii. 3. 48; iii. 4. 109. 
exatpercUe^ iii. 6. 38. 
forbid^ i. 3. 21. 
forgot, V. 5. 9. 
holp, i. 6. 23. 
overtook, iv. 1. 142. 
spoke, i. 4. 3; iv. 3. 11; v. 1. 41. 
stole, ii. 3. 49. 
sweaien, iv. 1. 62. 
pleonasm, ii. 1. 56. 
*« for his, V. 1. 66. 

„ us, i. 3. 125 ; iii. 1. 37 ; v. 6. 5. 
„ was, i. 2. 15. 
«Aa^ for will, iii. 2. 29. 
singular for plural {this), v. 5. 37. 
singular vferb with plural subject : is, i. 6. 28 ; ii. 3. 77. 

makes, iv. 3. 152. 
tidings, i. 5. 28. 
singular verb with two subjects : dotJi, i. 5. 27. 

is, ii. 3. 75; ii. 3. 122. 
runs, 1. 3. 147. 
so for as, i. 2. 43. 
something as adverb, iii. 1. 132. 
that for a«, iv. 3. 212. 

„ so that, ii. 2. 7; iv. 3. 6. 
upon, iii. 6. 30. 
which for u;Ao, i. 2. 21. 
while for ^tU, iii. 1. 44. 
who for Ac who, i. 3. 109. 

„ whom, iii. 1. 123; iii. 4. 42; iv. 3. 160. 
with for %, iii. 1. 63, 112. 
withal as adverb, i. 3. 57. 

„ preposition, i. 5. 28; ii. 1. 15; ii. 2. 56. 
would for should, i. 7. 34. 



(4) ANACHRONISMS. 



cannons, i. 2. 37. 
clock, ii. 1. 2. 



dollars, i. 2. 62. 

mariner's compass, i. 3. 17. 



(5) PUNS. 
gild, guilt, ii. 2. 56, 57. | goose, ii. 3. 14. 

(6) PASSAGES TO BE LEARNT. 

!• Good sir... nor your hate, i. 3. 51-61. 

2. That trusted home... in deepest consequence, i. 3. 120-126. 

3. I have spoke... an absolute trust, i. 4. 3-14. 



110 



MACBETH. 



4. This castle... is delicate, i. 6. 1-10. 

5. If it were done . . . falls on the other, L 7. 1-28. 

6. Would'st thou have... is none, i. 7. 41-47. 

7. Is this a dagger... or to hell, ii. 1. 33-63. 

8. Methought I heard . . . sleep no more, ii. 2. 35-43. 

9. WiU all... one red, ii. 2. 60-63. 

10. Thou seest...kiss it, ii. 4. 5-10. 

11. To be thus... to the utterance, iii. 1. 48-72. 

12. Better be... touch him further, iii. 2. 19-26. 

13. Come, seeling night... go with me, iii. 2. 46-56. 

14. Alas, poor country ... they sicken, iv. 3. 153-162. 

15. I have lived... and dare not, v. 3. 22-28. 

16. To-morrow... signifying nothing, v. 5. 19-28. 



The following passages contain special difficulties, and should be 
studied carefully with the corresponding notes: — 



Act i. Sc. 2. 21. 


Act iii. So. 4. 14. . 


„ Sc. 5. 20-23. 


„ Sc. 4. 105. 


„ Sc. 6. 11-14. 


„ Sc. 4. 112, 113 


„ Sc. 7. 1-12. 


„ Sc. 4. 124. 


„ Sc. 7. 21-28. 


Act iv. Sc. 2. 21, 22. 


„ Sc. 7. 35-38. 


„ Sc. 3. 34. 


Actii.Sc. 2. 73. 


Act V. Sc. 2. 3-5. 


„ Sc. 4. 28, 29. 


„ Sc. 4. 14-20. 


Act iii. Sc. 2. 38. 


Sc. 8. 41-43. 
